The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Book of Myths, by Jean Lang

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Book of Myths

Author: Jean Lang

Illustrator: Helen Stratton

Release Date: September 21, 2007 [EBook #22693]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BOOK OF MYTHS ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Sam W. and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









          A
    BOOK OF MYTHS

     BY JEAN LANG

   (MRS. JOHN LANG)

 WITH SIXTEEN ORIGINAL
  DRAWINGS IN COLOUR
   BY HELEN STRATTON


    [Illustration]


 THOMAS NELSON & SONS
       NEW YORK




PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




[Illustration: "WHAT WAS HE DOING, THE GREAT GOD PAN, DOWN IN THE
REEDS BY THE RIVER?" (See page 209)]




PREFACE


Just as a little child holds out its hands to catch the sunbeams, to
feel and to grasp what, so its eyes tell it, is actually there, so,
down through the ages, men have stretched out their hands in eager
endeavour to know their God. And because only through the human was
the divine knowable, the old peoples of the earth made gods of their
heroes and not unfrequently endowed these gods with as many of the
vices as of the virtues of their worshippers. As we read the myths of
the East and the West we find ever the same story. That portion of the
ancient Aryan race which poured from the central plain of Asia,
through the rocky defiles of what we now call "The Frontier," to
populate the fertile lowlands of India, had gods who must once have
been wholly heroic, but who came in time to be more degraded than the
most vicious of lustful criminals. And the Greeks, Latins, Teutons,
Celts, and Slavonians, who came of the same mighty Aryan stock, did
even as those with whom they owned a common ancestry. Originally they
gave to their gods of their best. All that was noblest in them, all
that was strongest and most selfless, all the higher instincts of
their natures were their endowment. And although their worship in time
became corrupt and lost its beauty, there yet remains for us, in the
old tales of the gods, a wonderful humanity that strikes a vibrant
chord in the hearts of those who are the descendants of their
worshippers. For though creeds and forms may change, human nature
never changes. We are less simple than our fathers: that is all. And,
as Professor York Powell[1] most truly says: "It is not in a man's
creed, but in his deeds; not in his knowledge, but in his sympathy,
that there lies the essence of what is good and of what will last in
human life."

The most usual habits of mind in our own day are the theoretical and
analytical habits. Dissection, vivisection, analysis--those are the
processes to which all things not conclusively historical and all
things spiritual are bound to pass. Thus we find the old myths
classified into Sun Myths and Dawn Myths, Earth Myths and Moon Myths,
Fire Myths and Wind Myths, until, as one of the most sane and vigorous
thinkers of the present day[2] has justly observed: "If you take the
rhyme of Mary and her little lamb, and call Mary the sun and the lamb
the moon, you will achieve astonishing results, both in religion and
astronomy, when you find that the lamb followed Mary to school one
day."

In this little collection of Myths, the stories are not presented to
the student of folklore as a fresh contribution to his knowledge.
Rather is the book intended for those who, in the course of their
reading, frequently come across names which possess for them no
meaning, and who care to read some old stories, through which runs the
same humanity that their own hearts know. For although the old worship
has passed away, it is almost impossible for us to open a book that
does not contain some mention of the gods of long ago. In our
childhood we are given copies of Kingsley's _Heroes_ and of
Hawthorne's _Tanglewood Tales_. Later on, we find in Shakespeare,
Spenser, Milton, Keats, Shelley, Longfellow, Tennyson, Mrs. Browning,
and a host of other writers, constant allusion to the stories of the
gods. Scarcely a poet has ever written but makes mention of them in
one or other of his poems. It would seem as if there were no get-away
from them. We might expect in this twentieth century that the old gods
of Greece and of Rome, the gods of our Northern forefathers, the gods
of Egypt, the gods of the British race, might be forgotten. But even
when we read in a newspaper of aeroplanes, someone is more than likely
to quote the story of Bellerophon and his winged steed, or of Icarus,
the flyer, and in our daily speech the names of gods and goddesses
continually crop up. We drive--or, at least, till lately we drove--in
Phaetons. Not only schoolboys swear by Jove or by Jupiter. The silvery
substance in our thermometers and barometers is named Mercury.
Blacksmiths are accustomed to being referred to as "sons of Vulcan,"
and beautiful youths to being called "young Adonises." We accept the
names of newspapers and debating societies as being the "Argus,"
without perhaps quite realising who was Argus, the many-eyed. We talk
of "a panic," and forget that the great god Pan is father of the word.
Even in our religious services we go back to heathenism. Not only are
the crockets on our cathedral spires and church pews remnants of
fire-worship, but one of our own most beautiful Christian blessings is
probably of Assyrian origin. "The Lord bless thee and keep thee....
The Lord make His face to shine upon thee.... The Lord lift up the
light of His countenance upon thee...." So did the priests of the
sun-gods invoke blessings upon those who worshipped.

We make many discoveries as we study the myths of the North and of the
South. In the story of Baldur we find that the goddess Hel ultimately
gave her name to the place of punishment precious to the Calvinistic
mind. And because the Norseman very much disliked the bitter, cruel
cold of the long winter, his heaven was a warm, well-fired abode, and
his place of punishment one of terrible frigidity. Somewhere on the
other side of the Tweed and Cheviots was the spot selected by the Celt
of southern Britain. On the other hand, the eastern mind, which knew
the terrors of a sun-smitten land and of a heat that was torture, had
for a hell a fiery place of constantly burning flames.

In the space permitted, it has not been possible to deal with more
than a small number of myths, and the well-known stories of Herakles,
of Theseus, and of the Argonauts have been purposely omitted. These
have been so perfectly told by great writers that to retell them would
seem absurd. The same applies to the Odyssey and the Iliad, the
translations of which probably take rank amongst the finest
translations in any language.

The writer will feel that her object has been gained should any
readers of these stories feel that for a little while they have left
the toilful utilitarianism of the present day behind them, and, with
it, its hampering restrictions of sordid actualities that are so
murderous to imagination and to all romance.

    "Great God! I'd rather be
    A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn;
    So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,
    Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn;
    Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea;
    Or hear old Triton blow his wreath√®d horn."

        JEAN LANG.


POSTSCRIPT

We have come, in those last long months, to date our happenings as
they have never until now been dated by those of our own generation.

We speak of things that took place "_Before the War_"; and between
that time and this stands a barrier immeasurable.

This book, with its Preface, was completed in 1914--"_Before the
War._"

Since August 1914 the finest humanity of our race has been enduring
Promethean agonies. But even as Prometheus unflinchingly bore the
cruelties of pain, of heat and of cold, of hunger and of thirst, and
the tortures inflicted by an obscene bird of prey, so have endured the
men of our nation and of those nations with whom we are proud to be
allied. Much more remote than they seemed one little year ago, now
seem the old stories of sunny Greece. But if we have studied the
strange transmogrification of the ancient gods, we can look with
interest, if with horror, at the Teuton representation of the GOD in
whom we believe as a GOD of perfect purity, of honour, and of love.
According to their interpretation of Him, the God of the Huns would
seem to be as much a confederate of the vicious as the most degraded
god of ancient worship. And if we turn with shame from the Divinity so
often and so glibly referred to by blasphemous lips, and look on a
picture that tears our hearts, and yet makes our hearts big with
pride, we can understand how it was that those heroes who fought and
died in the Valley of the Scamander came in time to be regarded not as
men, but as gods.

There is no tale in all the world's mythology finer than the tale that
began in August 1914. How future generations will tell the tale, who
can say?

But we, for whom Life can never be the same again, can say with all
earnestness: "It is the memory that the soldier leaves behind him,
like the long train of light that follows the sunken sun--that is all
which is worth caring for, which distinguishes the death of the brave
or the ignoble."

And, surely, to all those who are fighting, and suffering, and dying
for a noble cause, the GOD of gods, the GOD of battles, who is also
the GOD of peace, and the GOD of Love, has become an ever near and
eternally living entity.

    "Our little systems have their day;
    They have their day and cease to be,
    They are but broken lights of Thee,
    And Thou, oh Lord, art more than they."

        JEAN LANG.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Teutonic Heathendom._

[2] John Kelman, D.D., _Among Famous Books_.




CONTENTS


                                                  PAGE

  PROMETHEUS AND PANDORA                             1

  PYGMALION                                         11

  PHAETON                                           16

  ENDYMION                                          26

  ORPHEUS                                           31

  APOLLO AND DAPHNE                                 42

  PSYCHE                                            46

  THE CALYDONIAN HUNT                               69

  ATALANTA                                          78

  ARACHNE                                           82

  IDAS AND MARPESSA                                 90

  ARETHUSA                                         100

  PERSEUS THE HERO                                 105

  NIOBE                                            124

  HYACINTHUS                                       129

  KING MIDAS OF THE GOLDEN TOUCH                   134

  CEYX AND HALCYONE                                144

  ARIST√ÜUS THE BEE-KEEPER                          154

  PROSERPINE                                       161

  LATONA AND THE RUSTICS                           169

  ECHO AND NARCISSUS                               174

  ICARUS                                           181

  CLYTIE                                           189

  THE CRANES OF IBYCUS                             192

  SYRINX                                           197

  THE DEATH OF ADONIS                              202

  PAN                                              209

  LORELEI                                          220

  FREYA, QUEEN OF THE NORTHERN GODS                227

  THE DEATH OF BALDUR                              234

  BEOWULF                                          244

  ROLAND THE PALADIN                               266

  THE CHILDREN OF L√éR                              289

  DEIRDR√ä                                          306




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


  "What was he doing, the great god Pan,
  Down in the reeds by the river?"                   _Frontispiece_

                                                               PAGE

  Then Pygmalion covered his eyes                                12

  She checked her hounds, and stood beside Endymion              28

  Swiftly he turned, and found his wife behind him               38

  Thus did Psyche lose her fear, and enter the golden doors      52

  She stopped, and picked up the treasure                        80

  Marpessa sat alone by the fountain                             92

  They whimpered and begged of him                              112

  Darkness fell on the eyes of Hyacinthus                       132

  A grey cold morning found her on the seashore                 152

  She haunted him like his shadow                               176

  Freya sat spinning the clouds                                 228

  "Baldur the Beautiful is dead!"                               240

  A stroke shivered the sword                                   262

  Roland seized once more his horn                              282

  One touch for each with a magical wand of the Druids          294




A BOOK OF MYTHS




PROMETHEUS AND PANDORA


Those who are interested in watching the mental development of a child
must have noted that when the baby has learned to speak even a little,
it begins to show its growing intelligence by asking questions. "What
is this?" it would seem at first to ask with regard to simple things
that to it are still mysteries. Soon it arrives at the more
far-reaching inquiries--"Why is this so?" "How did this happen?" And
as the child's mental growth continues, the painstaking and
conscientious parent or guardian is many times faced by questions
which lack of knowledge, or a sensitive honesty, prevents him from
answering either with assurance or with ingenuity.

As with the child, so it has ever been with the human race. Man has
always come into the world asking "How?" "Why?" "What?" and so the
Hebrew, the Greek, the Maori, the Australian blackfellow, the
Norseman--in a word, each race of mankind--has formed for itself an
explanation of existence, an answer to the questions of the groping
child-mind--"Who made the world?" "What is God?" "What made a God
think of fire and air and water?" "Why am I, _I_?"

Into the explanation of creation and existence given by the Greeks
come the stories of Prometheus and of Pandora. The world, as first it
was, to the Greeks was such a world as the one of which we read in the
Book of Genesis--"without form, and void." It was a sunless world in
which land, air, and sea were mixed up together, and over which
reigned a deity called Chaos. With him ruled the goddess of Night and
their son was Erebus, god of Darkness. When the two beautiful children
of Erebus, Light and Day, had flooded formless space with their
radiance, Eros, the god of Love, was born, and Light and Day and Love,
working together, turned discord into harmony and made the earth, the
sea, and the sky into one perfect whole. A giant race, a race of
Titans, in time populated this newly-made earth, and of these one of
the mightiest was Prometheus. To him, and to his brother Epimethus,
was entrusted by Eros the distribution of the gifts of faculties and
of instincts to all the living creatures in the world, and the task of
making a creature lower than the gods, something less great than the
Titans, yet in knowledge and in understanding infinitely higher than
the beasts and birds and fishes. At the hands of the Titan brothers,
birds, beasts, and fishes had fared handsomely. They were Titanic in
their generosity, and so prodigal had they been in their gifts that
when they would fain have carried out the commands of Eros they found
that nothing was left for the equipment of this being, to be called
Man. Yet, nothing daunted, Prometheus took some clay from the ground
at his feet, moistened it with water, and fashioned it into an image,
in form like the gods. Into its nostrils Eros breathed the spirit of
life, Pallas Athen√© endowed it with a soul, and the first man looked
wonderingly round on the earth that was to be his heritage.
Prometheus, proud of the beautiful thing of his own creation, would
fain have given Man a worthy gift, but no gift remained for him. He
was naked, unprotected, more helpless than any of the beasts of the
field, more to be pitied than any of them in that he had a soul to
suffer.

Surely Zeus, the All Powerful, ruler of Olympus, would have compassion
on Man? But Prometheus looked to Zeus in vain; compassion he had none.
Then, in infinite pity, Prometheus bethought himself of a power
belonging to the gods alone and unshared by any living creature on the
earth.

"We shall give Fire to the Man whom we have made," he said to
Epimethus. To Epimethus this seemed an impossibility, but to
Prometheus nothing was impossible. He bided his time and, unseen by
the gods, he made his way into Olympus, lighted a hollow torch with a
spark from the chariot of the Sun and hastened back to earth with this
royal gift to Man. Assuredly no other gift could have brought him more
completely the empire that has since been his. No longer did he
tremble and cower in the darkness of caves when Zeus hurled his
lightnings across the sky. No more did he dread the animals that
hunted him and drove him in terror before them.

Armed with fire, the beasts became his vassals. With fire he forged
weapons, defied the frost and cold, coined money, made implements for
tillage, introduced the arts, and was able to destroy as well as to
create.

From his throne on Olympus, Zeus looked down on the earth and saw,
with wonder, airy columns of blue-grey smoke that curled upwards to
the sky. He watched more closely, and realised with terrible wrath
that the moving flowers of red and gold that he saw in that land that
the Titans shared with men, came from fire, that had hitherto been the
gods' own sacred power. Speedily he assembled a council of the gods to
mete out to Prometheus a punishment fit for the blasphemous daring of
his crime. This council decided at length to create a thing that
should for evermore charm the souls and hearts of men, and yet, for
evermore, be man's undoing.

To Vulcan, god of fire, whose province Prometheus had insulted, was
given the work of fashioning out of clay and water the creature by
which the honour of the gods was to be avenged. "The lame Vulcan,"
says Hesiod, poet of Greek mythology, "formed out of the earth an
image resembling a chaste virgin. Pallas Athen√©, of the blue eyes,
hastened to ornament her and to robe her in a white tunic. She dressed
on the crown of her head a long veil, skilfully fashioned and
admirable to see; she crowned her forehead with graceful garlands of
newly-opened flowers and a golden diadem that the lame Vulcan, the
illustrious god, had made with his own hands to please the puissant
Jove. On this crown Vulcan had chiselled the innumerable animals that
the continents and the sea nourish in their bosoms, all endowed with a
marvellous grace and apparently alive. When he had finally completed,
instead of some useful work, this illustrious masterpiece, he brought
into the assembly this virgin, proud of the ornaments with which she
had been decked by the blue-eyed goddess, daughter of a powerful
sire." To this beautiful creature, destined by the gods to be man's
destroyer, each of them gave a gift. From Aphrodite she got beauty,
from Apollo music, from Hermes the gift of a winning tongue. And when
all that great company in Olympus had bestowed their gifts, they named
the woman Pandora--"Gifted by all the Gods." Thus equipped for
victory, Pandora was led by Hermes to the world that was thenceforward
to be her home. As a gift from the gods she was presented to
Prometheus.

But Prometheus, gazing in wonder at the violet blue eyes bestowed by
Aphrodite, that looked wonderingly back into his own as if they were
indeed as innocent as two violets wet with the morning dew, hardened
his great heart, and would have none of her. As a hero--a worthy
descendant of Titans--said in later years, "Timeo Danaos et dona
ferentes,"--"I fear the Greeks, even when they bring gifts." And
Prometheus, the greatly-daring, knowing that he merited the anger of
the gods, saw treachery in a gift outwardly so perfect. Not only would
he not accept this exquisite creature for his own, but he hastened to
caution his brother also to refuse her.

But well were they named Prometheus (Forethought) and Epimethus
(Afterthought). For Epimethus it was enough to look at this peerless
woman, sent from the gods, for him to love her and to believe in her
utterly. She was the fairest thing on earth, worthy indeed of the
deathless gods who had created her. Perfect, too, was the happiness
that she brought with her to Epimethus. Before her coming, as he well
knew now, the fair world had been incomplete. Since she came the
fragrant flowers had grown more sweet for him, the song of the birds
more full of melody. He found new life in Pandora and marvelled how
his brother could ever have fancied that she could bring to the world
aught but peace and joyousness.

Now when the gods had entrusted to the Titan brothers the endowment of
all living things upon the earth, they had been careful to withhold
everything that might bring into the world pain, sickness, anxiety,
bitterness of heart, remorse, or soul-crushing sorrow. All these
hurtful things were imprisoned in a coffer which was given into the
care of the trusty Epimethus.

To Pandora the world into which she came was all fresh, all new, quite
full of unexpected joys and delightful surprises. It was a world of
mystery, but mystery of which her great, adoring, simple Titan held
the golden key. When she saw the coffer which never was opened, what
then more natural than that she should ask Epimethus what it
contained? But the contents were known only to the gods. Epimethus was
unable to answer. Day by day, the curiosity of Pandora increased. To
her the gods had never given anything but good. Surely there must be
here gifts more precious still. What if the Olympians had destined her
to be the one to open the casket, and had sent her to earth in order
that she might bestow on this dear world, on the men who lived on it,
and on her own magnificent Titan, happiness and blessings which only
the minds of gods could have conceived? Thus did there come a day when
Pandora, unconscious instrument in the hands of a vengeful Olympian,
in all faith, and with the courage that is born of faith and of love,
opened the lid of the prison-house of evil. And as from coffers in the
old Egyptian tombs, the live plague can still rush forth and slay, the
long-imprisoned evils rushed forth upon the fair earth and on the
human beings who lived on it--malignant, ruthless, fierce,
treacherous, and cruel--poisoning, slaying, devouring. Plague and
pestilence and murder, envy and malice and revenge and all
viciousness--an ugly wolf-pack indeed was that one let loose by
Pandora. Terror, doubt, misery, had all rushed straightway to attack
her heart, while the evils of which she had never dreamed stung mind
and soul into dismay and horror, when, by hastily shutting the lid of
the coffer, she tried to undo the evil she had done.

And lo, she found that the gods had imprisoned one good gift only in
this Inferno of horrors and of ugliness. In the world there had never
been any need of Hope. What work was there for Hope to do where all
was perfect, and where each creature possessed the desire of body and
of heart? Therefore Hope was thrust into the chest that held the
evils, a star in a black night, a lily growing on a dung-heap. And as
Pandora, white-lipped and trembling, looked into the otherwise empty
box, courage came back to her heart, and Epimethus let fall to his
side the arm that would have slain the woman of his love because there
came to him, like a draught of wine to a warrior spent in battle, an
imperial vision of the sons of men through all the aeons to come,
combatting all evils of body and of soul, going on conquering and to
conquer. Thus, saved by Hope, the Titan and the woman faced the
future, and for them the vengeance of the gods was stayed.

                          "Yet I argue not
    Against Heav'n's hand or will, nor bate a jot
    Of heart or hope; but still bear up and steer
    Right onward."

So spoke Milton, the blind Titan of the seventeenth century; and
Shakespeare says:

    "True hope is swift, and flies with swallow's wings;
    Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings."

Upon the earth, and on the children of men who were as gods in their
knowledge and mastery of the force of fire, Jupiter had had his
revenge. For Prometheus he reserved another punishment. He, the
greatly-daring, once the dear friend and companion of Zeus himself,
was chained to a rock on Mount Caucasus by the vindictive deity.
There, on a dizzy height, his body thrust against the sun-baked rock,
Prometheus had to endure the torment of having a foul-beaked vulture
tear out his liver, as though he were a piece of carrion lying on the
mountain side. All day, while the sun mercilessly smote him and the
blue sky turned from red to black before his pain-racked eyes, the
torture went on. Each night, when the filthy bird of prey that worked
the will of the gods spread its dark wings and flew back to its eyrie,
the Titan endured the cruel mercy of having his body grow whole once
more. But with daybreak there came again the silent shadow, the smell
of the unclean thing, and again with fierce beak and talons the
vulture greedily began its work.

Thirty thousand years was the time of his sentence, and yet Prometheus
knew that at any moment he could have brought his torment to an end. A
secret was his--a mighty secret, the revelation of which would have
brought him the mercy of Zeus and have reinstated him in the favour of
the all-powerful god. Yet did he prefer to endure his agonies rather
than to free himself by bowing to the desires of a tyrant who had
caused Man to be made, yet denied to Man those gifts that made him
nobler than the beasts and raised him almost to the heights of the
Olympians. Thus for him the weary centuries dragged by--in suffering
that knew no respite--in endurance that the gods might have ended.
Prometheus had brought an imperial gift to the men that he had made,
and imperially he paid the penalty.

    "Three thousand years of sleep-unsheltered hours,
    And moments aye divided by keen pangs
    Till they seemed years, torture and solitude,
    Scorn and despair,--these are mine empire.
    More glorious far than that which thou surveyest
    From thine unenvied throne, O, Mighty God!
    Almighty, had I deigned to share the shame
    Of thine ill tyranny, and hung not here
    Nailed to this wall of eagle-baffling mountain,
    Black, wintry, dead, unmeasured; without herb,
    Insect, or beast, or shape or sound of life.
    Ah me! alas, pain, pain ever, for ever!"

        Shelley.

    "Titan! to whose immortal eyes
    The sufferings of mortality
    Seen in their sad reality,
    Were not as things that gods despise;
    What was thy pity's recompense?
    A silent suffering, and intense;
    The rock, the vulture, and the chain,
    All that the proud can feel of pain,
    The agony they do not show,
    The suffocating sense of woe,
    Which speaks but in its loneliness,
    And then is jealous lest the sky
    Should have a listener, nor will sigh
    Until its voice is echoless."

        Byron.

    "Yet, I am still Prometheus, wiser grown
    By years of solitude,--that holds apart
    The past and future, giving the soul room
    To search into itself,--and long commune
    With this eternal silence;--more a god,
    In my long-suffering and strength to meet
    With equal front the direst shafts of fate,
    Than thou in thy faint-hearted despotism ...
    Therefore, great heart, bear up! thou art but type
    Of what all lofty spirits endure that fain
    Would win men back to strength and peace through love:
    Each hath his lonely peak, and on each heart
    Envy, or scorn or hatred tears lifelong
    With vulture beak; yet the high soul is left;
    And faith, which is but hope grown wise, and love
    And patience, which at last shall overcome."

        Lowell.




PYGMALION


In days when the world was young and when the gods walked on the
earth, there reigned over the island of Cyprus a sculptor-king, and
king of sculptors, named Pygmalion. In the language of our own day, we
should call him "wedded to his art." In woman he only saw the bane of
man. Women, he believed, lured men from the paths to which their
destiny called them. While man walked alone, he walked free--he had
given no "hostages to fortune." Alone, man could live for his art,
could combat every danger that beset him, could escape, unhampered,
from every pitfall in life. But woman was the ivy that clings to the
oak, and throttles the oak in the end. No woman, vowed Pygmalion,
should ever hamper him. And so at length he came to hate women, and,
free of heart and mind, his genius wrought such great things that he
became a very perfect sculptor. He had one passion, a passion for his
art, and that sufficed him. Out of great rough blocks of marble he
would hew the most perfect semblance of men and of women, and of
everything that seemed to him most beautiful and the most worth
preserving.

When we look now at the Venus of Milo, at the Diana of Versailles, and
at the Apollo Belvidere in the Vatican, we can imagine what were the
greater things that the sculptor of Cyprus freed from the dead blocks
of marble. One day as he chipped and chiselled there came to him,
like the rough sketch of a great picture, the semblance of a woman.
How it came he knew not. Only he knew that in that great mass of pure
white stone there seemed to be imprisoned the exquisite image of a
woman, a woman that he must set free. Slowly, gradually, the woman
came. Soon he knew that she was the most beautiful thing that his art
had ever wrought. All that he had ever thought that a woman _should_
be, this woman was. Her form and features were all most perfect, and
so perfect were they, that he felt very sure that, had she been a
woman indeed, most perfect would have been the soul within. For her he
worked as he had never worked before. There came, at last, a day when
he felt that another touch would be insult to the exquisite thing he
had created. He laid his chisel aside and sat down to gaze at the
Perfect Woman. She seemed to gaze back at him. Her parted lips were
ready to speak--to smile. Her hands were held out to hold his hands.
Then Pygmalion covered his eyes. He, the hater of women, loved a
woman--a woman of chilly marble. The women he had scorned were
avenged.

[Illustration: THEN PYGMALION COVERED HIS EYES]

Day by day his passion for the woman of his own creation grew and
grew. His hands no longer wielded the chisel. They grew idle. He would
stand under the great pines and gaze across the sapphire-blue sea, and
dream strange dreams of a marble woman who walked across the waves
with arms outstretched, with smiling lips, and who became a woman of
warm flesh and blood when her bare feet touched the yellow sand, and
the bright sun of Cyprus touched her marble hair and turned it into
hair of living gold. Then he would hasten back to his studio to find
the miracle still unaccomplished, and would passionately kiss the
little cold hands, and lay beside the little cold feet the presents he
knew that young girls loved--bright shells and exquisite precious
stones, gorgeous-hued birds and fragrant flowers, shining amber, and
beads that sparkled and flashed with all the most lovely combinations
of colour that the mind of artist could devise. Yet more he did, for
he spent vast sums on priceless pearls and hung them in her ears and
upon her cold white breast; and the merchants wondered who could be
the one upon whom Pygmalion lavished the money from his treasury.

To his divinity he gave a name--"Galatea"; and always on still nights
the myriad silver stars would seem to breathe to him "Galatea" ... and
on those days when the tempests blew across the sandy wastes of Arabia
and churned up the fierce white surf on the rocks of Cyprus, the very
spirit of the storm seemed to moan through the crash of waves in
longing, hopeless and unutterable--"Galatea!... Galatea!..." For her
he decked a couch with Tyrian purple, and on the softest of pillows he
laid the beautiful head of the marble woman that he loved.

So the time wore on until the festival of Aphrodite drew near. Smoke
from many altars curled out to sea, the odour of incense mingled with
the fragrance of the great pine trees, and garlanded victims lowed and
bleated as they were led to the sacrifice. As the leader of his
people, Pygmalion faithfully and perfectly performed all his part in
the solemnities and at last he was left beside the altar to pray
alone. Never before had his words faltered as he laid his petitions
before the gods, but on this day he spoke not as a sculptor-king, but
as a child who was half afraid of what he asked.

"O Aphrodite!" he said, "who can do all things, give me, I pray you,
one like my Galatea for my wife!"

"Give me my Galatea," he dared not say; but Aphrodite knew well the
words he would fain have uttered, and smiled to think how Pygmalion at
last was on his knees. In token that his prayer was answered, three
times she made the flames on the altar shoot up in a fiery point, and
Pygmalion went home, scarcely daring to hope, not allowing his
gladness to conquer his fear.

The shadows of evening were falling as he went into the room that he
had made sacred to Galatea. On the purple-covered couch she lay, and
as he entered it seemed as though she met his eyes with her own;
almost it seemed that she smiled at him in welcome. He quickly went up
to her and, kneeling by her side, he pressed his lips on those lips of
chilly marble. So many times he had done it before, and always it was
as though the icy lips that could never live sent their chill right
through his heart, but now it surely seemed to him that the lips were
cold no longer. He felt one of the little hands, and no more did it
remain heavy and cold and stiff in his touch, but lay in his own hand,
soft and living and warm. He softly laid his fingers on the marble
hair, and lo, it was the soft and wavy burnished golden hair of his
desire. Again, reverently as he had laid his offerings that day on
the altar of Venus, Pygmalion kissed her lips. And then did Galatea,
with warm and rosy cheeks, widely open her eyes, like pools in a dark
mountain stream on which the sun is shining, and gaze with timid
gladness into his own.

There are no after tales of Pygmalion and Galatea. We only know that
their lives were happy and that to them was born a son, Paphos, from
whom the city sacred to Aphrodite received its name. Perhaps Aphrodite
may have smiled sometimes to watch Pygmalion, once the scorner of
women, the adoring servant of the woman that his own hands had first
designed.




PHAETON

    "The road, to drive on which unskilled were Phaeton's hands."

        Dante--_Purgatorio_.


To Apollo, the sun-god, and Clymene, a beautiful ocean-nymph, there
was born in the pleasant land of Greece a child to whom was given the
name of Phaeton, the Bright and Shining One. The rays of the sun
seemed to live in the curls of the fearless little lad, and when at
noon other children would seek the cool shade of the cypress groves,
Phaeton would hold his head aloft and gaze fearlessly up at the brazen
sky from whence fierce heat beat down upon his golden head.

"Behold, my father drives his chariot across the heavens!" he proudly
proclaimed. "In a little while I, also, will drive the four snow-white
steeds."

His elders heard the childish boast with a smile, but when Epaphos,
half-brother to Apollo, had listened to it many times and beheld the
child, Phaeton, grow into an arrogant lad who held himself as though
he were indeed one of the Immortals, anger grew in his heart. One day
he turned upon Phaeton and spoke in fierce scorn:

"Dost say thou art son of a god? A shameless boaster and a liar art
thou! Hast ever spoken to thy divine sire? Give us some proof of thy
sonship! No more child of the glorious Apollo art thou than are the
vermin his children, that the sun breeds in the dust at my feet."

For a moment, before the cruel taunt, the lad was stricken into
silence, and then, his pride aflame, his young voice shaking with rage
and with bitter shame, he cried aloud: "Thou, Epaphos, art the liar. I
have but to ask my father, and thou shalt see me drive his golden
chariot across the sky."

To his mother he hastened, to get balm for his hurt pride, as many a
time he had got it for the little bodily wounds of childhood, and with
bursting heart he poured forth his story.

"True it is," he said, "that my father has never deigned to speak to
me. Yet I know, because thou hast told me so, that he is my sire. And
now my word is pledged. Apollo must let me drive his steeds, else I am
for evermore branded braggart and liar, and shamed amongst men."

Clymene listened with grief to his complaint. He was so young, so
gallant, so foolish.

"Truly thou art the son of Apollo," she said, "and oh, son of my
heart, thy beauty is his, and thy pride the pride of a son of the
gods. Yet only partly a god art thou, and though thy proud courage
would dare all things, it were mad folly to think of doing what a god
alone can do."

But at last she said to him, "Naught that I can say is of any avail.
Go, seek thy father, and ask him what thou wilt." Then she told him
how he might find the place in the east where Apollo rested ere the
labours of the day began, and with eager gladness Phaeton set out upon
his journey. A long way he travelled, with never a stop, yet when the
glittering dome and jewelled turrets and minarets of the Palace of the
Sun came into view, he forgot his weariness and hastened up the steep
ascent to the home of his father.

Ph≈ìbus Apollo, clad in purple that glowed like the radiance of a
cloud in the sunset sky, sat upon his golden throne. The Day, the
Month, and the Year stood by him, and beside them were the Hours.
Spring was there, her head wreathed with flowers; Summer, crowned with
ripened grain; Autumn, with his feet empurpled by the juice of the
grapes; and Winter, with hair all white and stiff with hoar-frost. And
when Phaeton walked up the golden steps that led to his father's
throne, it seemed as though incarnate Youth had come to join the court
of the god of the Sun, and that Youth was so beautiful a thing that it
must surely live forever. Proudly did Apollo know him for his son, and
when the boy looked in his eyes with the arrogant fearlessness of
boyhood, the god greeted him kindly and asked him to tell him why he
came, and what was his petition.

As to Clymene, so also to Apollo, Phaeton told his tale, and his
father listened, half in pride and amusement, half in puzzled
vexation. When the boy stopped, and then breathlessly, with shining
eyes and flushed cheeks, ended up his story with: "And, O light of the
boundless world, if I am indeed thy son, let it be as I have said, and
for one day only let me drive thy chariot across the heavens!" Apollo
shook his head and answered very gravely:

"In truth thou art my dear son," he said, "and by the dreadful Styx,
the river of the dead, I swear that I will give thee any gift that
thou dost name and that will give proof that thy father is the
immortal Apollo. But never to thee nor to any other, be he mortal or
immortal, shall I grant the boon of driving my chariot."

But the boy pled on:

"I am shamed for ever, my father," he said. "Surely thou wouldst not
have son of thine proved liar and braggart?"

"Not even the gods themselves can do this thing," answered Apollo.
"Nay, not even the almighty Zeus. None but I, Ph≈ìbus Apollo, may
drive the flaming chariot of the sun, for the way is beset with
dangers and none know it but I."

"Only tell me the way, my father!" cried Phaeton. "So soon I could
learn."

Half in sadness, Apollo smiled.

"The first part of the way is uphill," he said. "So steep it is that
only very slowly can my horses climb it. High in the heavens is the
middle, so high that even I grow dizzy when I look down upon the earth
and the sea. And the last piece of the way is a precipice that rushes
so steeply downward that my hands can scarce check the mad rush of my
galloping horses. And all the while, the heaven is spinning round, and
the stars with it. By the horns of the Bull I have to drive, past the
Archer whose bow is taut and ready to slay, close to where the
Scorpion stretches out its arms and the great Crab's claws grope for a
prey...."

"I fear none of these things, oh my father!" cried Phaeton. "Grant
that for one day only I drive thy white-maned steeds!"

Very pitifully Apollo looked at him, and for a little space he was
silent.

"The little human hands," he said at length, "the little human
frame!--and with them the soul of a god. The pity of it, my son. Dost
not know that the boon that thou dost crave from me is Death?"

"Rather Death than Dishonour," said Phaeton, and proudly he added,
"For once would I drive like the god, my father. I have no fear."

So was Apollo vanquished, and Phaeton gained his heart's desire.

From the courtyard of the Palace the four white horses were led, and
they pawed the air and neighed aloud in the glory of their strength.
They drew the chariot whose axle and pole and wheels were of gold,
with spokes of silver, while inside were rows of diamonds and of
chrysolites that gave dazzling reflection of the sun. Then Apollo
anointed the face of Phaeton with a powerful essence that might keep
him from being smitten by the flames, and upon his head he placed the
rays of the sun. And then the stars went away, even to the Daystar
that went last of all, and, at Apollo's signal, Aurora, the
rosy-fingered, threw open the purple gates of the east, and Phaeton
saw a path of pale rose-colour open before him.

With a cry of exultation, the boy leapt into the chariot and laid hold
of the golden reins. Barely did he hear Apollo's parting words: "Hold
fast the reins, and spare the whip. All thy strength will be wanted to
hold the horses in. Go not too high nor too low. The middle course is
safest and best. Follow, if thou canst, in the old tracks of my
chariot wheels!" His glad voice of thanks for the godlike boon rang
back to where Apollo stood and watched him vanishing into the dawn
that still was soft in hue as the feathers on the breast of a dove.

Uphill at first the white steeds made their way, and the fire from
their nostrils tinged with flame-colour the dark clouds that hung over
the land and the sea. With rapture, Phaeton felt that truly he was the
son of a god, and that at length he was enjoying his heritage. The day
for which, through all his short life, he had longed, had come at
last. He was driving the chariot whose progress even now was awaking
the sleeping earth. The radiance from its wheels and from the rays he
wore round his head was painting the clouds, and he laughed aloud in
rapture as he saw, far down below, the sea and the rivers he had
bathed in as a human boy, mirroring the green and rose and purple, and
gold and silver, and fierce crimson, that he, Phaeton, was placing in
the sky. The grey mist rolled from the mountain tops at his desire.
The white fog rolled up from the valleys. All living things awoke; the
flowers opened their petals; the grain grew golden; the fruit grew
ripe. Could but Epaphos see him now! Surely he must see him, and
realise that not Apollo but Phaeton was guiding the horses of his
father, driving the chariot of the Sun.

Quicker and yet more quick grew the pace of the white-maned steeds.
Soon they left the morning breezes behind, and very soon they knew
that these were not the hands of the god, their master, that held the
golden reins. Like an air-ship without its accustomed ballast, the
chariot rolled unsteadily, and not only the boy's light weight but his
light hold on their bridles made them grow mad with a lust for speed.
The white foam flew from their mouths like the spume from the giant
waves of a furious sea, and their pace was swift as that of a bolt
that is cast by the arm of Zeus.

Yet Phaeton had no fear, and when they heard him shout in rapture,
"Quicker still, brave ones! more swiftly still!" it made them speed
onwards, madly, blindly, with the headlong rush of a storm. There was
no hope for them to keep on the beaten track, and soon Phaeton had his
rapture checked by the terrible realisation that they had strayed far
out of the course and that his hands were not strong enough to guide
them. Close to the Great Bear and the Little Bear they passed, and
these were scorched with heat. The Serpent which, torpid, chilly and
harmless, lies coiled round the North Pole, felt a warmth that made it
grow fierce and harmful again. Downward, ever downward galloped the
maddened horses, and soon Phaeton saw the sea as a shield of molten
brass, and the earth so near that all things on it were visible. When
they passed the Scorpion and only just missed destruction from its
menacing fangs, fear entered into the boy's heart. His mother had
spoken truth. He was only partly a god, and he was very, very young.
In impotent horror he tugged at the reins to try to check the horses'
descent, then, forgetful of Apollo's warning, he smote them angrily.
But anger met anger, and the fury of the immortal steeds had scorn
for the wrath of a mortal boy. With a great toss of their mighty heads
they had torn the guiding reins from his grasp, and as he stood,
giddily swaying from side to side, Phaeton knew that the boon he had
craved from his father must in truth be death for him.

And, lo, it was a hideous death, for with eyes that were like flames
that burned his brain, the boy beheld the terrible havoc that his
pride had wrought. That blazing chariot of the Sun made the clouds
smoke, and dried up all the rivers and water-springs. Fire burst from
the mountain tops, great cities were destroyed. The beauty of the
earth was ravished, woods and meadows and all green and pleasant
places were laid waste. The harvests perished, the flocks and they who
had herded them lay dead. Over Libya the horses took him, and the
desert of Libya remains a barren wilderness to this day, while those
sturdy Ethiopians who survived are black even now as a consequence of
that cruel heat. The Nile changed its course in order to escape, and
nymphs and nereids in terror sought for the sanctuary of some watery
place that had escaped destruction. The face of the burned and
blackened earth, where the bodies of thousands of human beings lay
charred to ashes, cracked and sent dismay to Pluto by the lurid light
that penetrated even to his throne.

All this Phaeton saw, saw in impotent agony of soul. His boyish folly
and pride had been great, but the excruciating anguish that made him
shed tears of blood, was indeed a punishment even too heavy for an
erring god.

From the havoc around her, the Earth at last looked up, and with
blackened face and blinded eyes, and in a voice that was harsh and
very, very weary, she called to Zeus to look down from Olympus and
behold the ruin that had been wrought by the chariot of the Sun. And
Zeus, the cloud-gatherer, looked down and beheld. And at the sight of
that piteous devastation his brow grew dark, and terrible was his
wrath against him who had held the reins of the chariot. Calling upon
Apollo and all the other gods to witness him, he seized a lightning
bolt, and for a moment the deathless Zeus and all the dwellers in
Olympus looked on the fiery chariot in which stood the swaying,
slight, lithe figure of a young lad, blinded with horror, shaken with
agony. Then, from his hand, Zeus cast the bolt, and the chariot was
dashed into fragments, and Phaeton, his golden hair ablaze, fell, like
a bright shooting star, from the heavens above, into the river
Eridanus. The steeds returned to their master, Apollo, and in rage and
grief Apollo lashed them. Angrily, too, and very rebelliously did he
speak of the punishment meted to his son by the ruler of the
Immortals. Yet in truth the punishment was a merciful one. Phaeton was
only half a god, and no human life were fit to live after the day of
dire anguish that had been his.

Bitter was the mourning of Clymene over her beautiful only son, and so
ceaselessly did his three sisters, the Heliades, weep for their
brother, that the gods turned them into poplar trees that grew by the
bank of the river, and, when still they wept, their tears turned into
precious amber as they fell. Yet another mourned for Phaeton--Phaeton
"dead ere his prime." Cycnus, King of Liguria, had dearly loved the
gallant boy, and again and yet again he dived deep in the river and
brought forth the charred fragments of what had once been the
beautiful son of a god, and gave to them honourable burial. Yet he
could not rest satisfied that he had won all that remained of his
friend from the river's bed, and so he continued to haunt the stream,
ever diving, ever searching, until the gods grew weary of his restless
sorrow and changed him into a swan.

And still we see the swan sailing mournfully along, like a
white-sailed barque that is bearing the body of a king to its rest,
and ever and anon plunging deep into the water as though the search
for the boy who would fain have been a god were never to come to an
end.

To Phaeton the Italian Naiades reared a tomb, and inscribed on the
stone these words:

    "Driver of Ph≈ìbus' chariot, Pha√´ton,
    Struck by Jove's thunder, rests beneath this stone,
    He could not rule his father's car of fire,
    Yet was it much, so nobly to aspire."

        Ovid.




ENDYMION


To the modern popular mind perhaps none of the goddesses of
Greece--not even Venus herself--has more appeal than has the huntress
goddess, Diana. Those who know but little of ancient statuary can
still brighten to intelligent recognition of the huntress with her
quiver and her little stag when they meet with them in picture gallery
or in suburban garden. That unlettered sportsman in weather-worn pink,
slowly riding over the fragrant dead leaves by the muddy roadside on
this chill, grey morning, may never have heard of Artemis, but he is
quite ready to make intelligent reference to Diana to the handsome
young sportswoman whom he finds by the covert side; and Sir Walter's
Diana Vernon has helped the little-read public to realise that the
original Diana was a goddess worthy of being sponsor to one of the
finest heroines of fiction.

But not to the sportsman alone, but also to the youth or maid who
loves the moon--they know not why--to those whom the shadows of the
trees on a woodland path at night mean a grip of the heart, while
"pale Dian" scuds over the dark clouds that are soaring far beyond the
tree-tops and is peeping, chaste and pale, through the branches of the
firs and giant pines, there is something arresting, enthralling, in
the thought of the goddess Diana who now has for hunting-ground the
blue firmament of heaven where the pale Pleiades

    "Glitter like a swarm of fire-flies tangled in a silver braid."

        Tennyson.

    "She gleans her silvan trophies; down the wold
    She hears the sobbing of the stags that flee
    Mixed with the music of the hunting roll'd,
    But her delight is all in archery,
    And naught of ruth and pity wotteth she
    More than her hounds that follow on the flight;
    The goddess draws a golden bow of might
    And thick she rains the gentle shafts that slay.
    She tosses loose her locks upon the night,
    And through the dim wood Dian threads her way."

        Andrew Lang.

Again and again in mythological history we come on stories of the
goddess, sometimes under her best known name of Diana, sometimes under
her older Greek name of Artemis, and now and again as Selene, the
moon-goddess, the Luna of the Romans. Her twin brother was Apollo, god
of the sun, and with him she shared the power of unerringly wielding a
bow and of sending grave plagues and pestilences, while both were
patrons of music and of poetry.

When the sun-god's golden chariot had driven down into the west, then
would his sister's noiseless-footed silver steeds be driven across the
sky, while the huntress shot from her bow at will silent arrows that
would slay without warning a joyous young mother with her newly-born
babe, or would wantonly pierce, with a lifelong pain, the heart of
some luckless mortal.

Now one night as she passed Mount Latmos, there chanced to be a
shepherd lad lying asleep beside his sleeping flock. Many times had
Endymion watched the goddess from afar, half afraid of one so
beautiful and yet so ruthless, but never before had Diana realised the
youth's wonderful beauty. She checked her hounds when they would have
swept on in their chase through the night, and stood beside Endymion.
She judged him to be as perfect as her own brother, Apollo--yet more
perfect, perhaps, for on his upturned sleeping face was the silver
glamour of her own dear moon. Fierce and burning passion could come
with the sun's burning rays, but love that came in the moon's pale
light was passion mixed with gramarye. She gazed for long, and when,
in his sleep, Endymion smiled, she knelt beside him and, stooping,
gently kissed his lips. The touch of a moonbeam on a sleeping rose was
no more gentle than was Diana's touch, yet it was sufficient to wake
Endymion. And as, while one's body sleeps on, one's half-waking mind,
now and again in a lifetime seems to realise an ecstasy of happiness
so perfect that one dares not wake lest, by waking, the wings of one's
realised ideal should slip between grasping fingers and so escape
forever, so did Endymion realise the kiss of the goddess. But before
his sleepy eyes could be his senses' witnesses, Diana had hastened
away. Endymion, springing to his feet, saw only his sleeping flock,
nor did his dogs awake when he heard what seemed to him to be the
baying of hounds in full cry in a forest far up the mountain. Only to
his own heart did he dare to whisper what was this wonderful thing
that he believed had befallen him, and although he laid himself
down, hoping that once again this miracle might be granted to him, no
miracle came; nor could he sleep, so great was his longing.

[Illustration: SHE CHECKED HER HOUNDS, AND STOOD BESIDE ENDYMION]

All the next day, through the sultry hours while Apollo drove his
chariot of burnished gold through the land, Endymion, as he watched
his flocks, tried to dream his dream once more, and longed for the day
to end and the cool, dark night to return. When night came he tried to
lie awake and see what might befall, but when kind sleep had closed
his tired eyes,

    "There came a lovely vision of a maid,
    Who seemed to step as from a golden car
    Out of the low-hung moon."

        Lewis Morris.

Always she kissed him, yet when her kiss awoke him he never could see
anything more tangible than a shaft of silver moonlight on the moving
bushes of the mountain side, never hear anything more real than the
far-away echo of the baying of pursuing hounds, and if, with eager,
greatly-daring eyes, he looked skywards, a dark cloud, so it seemed to
him, would always hasten to hide the moon from his longing gaze.

In this manner time passed on. The days of Endymion were filled by
longing day-dreams. His sleeping hours ever brought him ecstasy. Ever,
too, to the goddess, the human being that she loved seemed to her to
grow more precious. For her all the joy of day and of night was
concentrated in the moments she spent by the side of the sleeping
Endymion. The flocks of the shepherd flourished like those of no other
herd. No wild beast dared come near them; no storm nor disease
assailed them. Yet for Endymion the things of earth no longer held any
value. He lived only for his dear dream's sake. Had he been permitted
to grow old and worn and tired, and still a dreamer, who knows how his
story might have ended? But to Diana there came the fear that with age
his beauty might wane, and from her father, Zeus, she obtained for the
one she loved the gifts of unending youth and of eternal sleep.

There came a night when the dreams of Endymion had no end. That was a
night when the moon made for herself broad silver paths across the
sea, from far horizon to the shore where the little waves lapped and
curled in a radiant, ever-moving silver fringe. Silver also were the
leaves of the forest trees, and between the branches of the solemn
cypresses and of the stately dark pines, Diana shot her silver arrows.
No baying of hounds came then to make Endymion's flocks move uneasily
in their sleep, but the silver stars seemed to sing in unison
together. While still those gentle lips touched his, hands as gentle
lifted up the sleeping Endymion and bore him to a secret cave in Mount
Latmos. And there, for evermore, she came to kiss the mouth of her
sleeping lover. There, forever, slept Endymion, happy in the perfect
bliss of dreams that have no ugly awaking, of an ideal love that knows
no ending.




ORPHEUS

    "Orpheus with his lute made trees,
    And the mountain tops that freeze,
    Bow themselves when he did sing;
    To his music plants and flowers
    Ever sprung, as sun and showers
    There had made a lasting spring.
    Everything that heard him play,
    Even the billows of the sea,
    Hung their heads, and then lay by,
    In sweet music is such art,
    Killing care and grief of heart
    Fall asleep, or hearing die."

        Shakespeare.

    "Are we not all lovers as Orpheus was, loving what is
    gone from us forever, and seeking it vainly in the
    solitudes and wilderness of the mind, and crying to
    Eurydice to come again? And are we not all foolish as
    Orpheus was, hoping by the agony of love and the ecstasy
    of will to win back Eurydice; and do we not all fail, as
    Orpheus failed, because we forsake the way of the other
    world for the way of this world?"

        Fiona Macleod.


It is the custom nowadays for scientists and for other scholarly
people to take hold of the old myths, to take them to pieces, and to
find some deep, hidden meaning in each part of the story. So you will
find that some will tell you that Orpheus is the personification of
the winds which "tear up trees as they course along, chanting their
wild music," and that Eurydice is the morning "with its short-lived
beauty." Others say that Orpheus is "the mythological expression of
the delight which music gives to the primitive races," while yet
others accept without hesitation the idea that Orpheus is the sun
that, when day is done, plunges into the black abyss of night, in the
vain hope of overtaking his lost bride, Eurydice, the rosy dawn. And,
whether they be right or wrong, it would seem that the sadness that
comes to us sometimes as the day dies and the last of the sun's rays
vanish to leave the hills and valleys dark and cold, the sorrowful
feeling that we cannot understand when, in country places, we hear
music coming from far away, or listen to the plaintive song of the
bird, are things that very specially belong to the story of Orpheus.

In the country of Thrace, surrounded by all the best gifts of the
gods, Orpheus was born. His father was Apollo, the god of music and of
song, his mother the muse Calliope. Apollo gave his little son a lyre,
and himself taught him how to play it. It was not long before all the
wild things in the woods of Thrace crept out from the green trees and
thick undergrowth, and from the holes and caves in the rocks, to
listen to the music that the child's fingers made. The coo of the dove
to his mate, the flute-clear trill of the blackbird, the song of the
lark, the liquid carol of the nightingale--all ceased when the boy
made music. The winds that whispered their secrets to the trees owned
him for their lord, and the proudest trees of the forest bowed their
heads that they might not miss one exquisite sigh that his fingers
drew from the magical strings. Nor man nor beast lived in his day that
he could not sway by the power of his melody. He played a lullaby, and
all things slept. He played a love-lilt, and the flowers sprang up in
full bloom from the cold earth, and the dreaming red rosebud opened
wide her velvet petals, and all the land seemed full of the loving
echoes of the lilt he played. He played a war-march, and, afar off,
the sleeping tyrants of the forest sprang up, wide awake, and bared
their angry teeth, and the untried youths of Thrace ran to beg their
fathers to let them taste battle, while the scarred warriors felt on
their thumbs the sharpness of their sword blades, and smiled, well
content. While he played it would seem as though the very stones and
rocks gained hearts. Nay, the whole heart of the universe became one
great, palpitating, beautiful thing, an instrument from whose
trembling strings was drawn out the music of Orpheus.

He rose to great power, and became a mighty prince of Thrace. Not his
lute alone, but he himself played on the heart of the fair Eurydice
and held it captive. It seemed as though, when they became man and
wife, all happiness must be theirs. But although Hymen, the god of
marriage, himself came to bless them on the day they wed, the omens on
that day were against them. The torch that Hymen carried had no golden
flame, but sent out pungent black smoke that made their eyes water.
They feared they knew not what; but when, soon afterwards, as Eurydice
wandered with the nymphs, her companions, through the blue-shadowed
woods of Thrace, the reason was discovered. A bold shepherd, who did
not know her for a princess, saw Eurydice, and no sooner saw her than
he loved her. He ran after her to proclaim to her his love, and she,
afraid of his wild uncouthness, fled before him. She ran, in her
terror, too swiftly to watch whither she went, and a poisonous snake
that lurked amongst the fern bit the fair white foot that flitted,
like a butterfly, across it. In agonised suffering Eurydice died. Her
spirit went to the land of the Shades, and Orpheus was left
broken-hearted.

The sad winds that blow at night across the sea, the sobbing gales
that tell of wreck and death, the birds that wail in the darkness for
their mates, the sad, soft whisper of the aspen leaves and the leaves
of the heavy clad blue-black cypresses, all now were hushed, for
greater than all, more full of bitter sorrow than any, arose the music
of Orpheus, a long-drawn sob from a broken heart in the Valley of the
Shadow of Death.

Grief came alike to gods and to men as they listened, but no comfort
came to him from the expression of his sorrow. At length, when to bear
his grief longer was impossible for him, Orpheus wandered to Olympus,
and there besought Zeus to give him permission to seek his wife in the
gloomy land of the Shades. Zeus, moved by his anguish, granted the
permission he sought, but solemnly warned him of the terrible perils
of his undertaking.

But the love of Orpheus was too perfect to know any fear; thankfully
he hastened to the dark cave on the side of the promontory of
Taenarus, and soon arrived at the entrance of Hades. Stark and grim
was the three-headed watchdog, Cerberus, which guarded the door, and
with the growls and the furious roaring of a wild beast athirst for
its prey it greeted Orpheus. But Orpheus touched his lute, and the
brute, amazed, sank into silence. And still he played, and the dog
would gently have licked the player's feet, and looked up in his face
with its savage eyes full of the light that we see in the eyes of the
dogs of this earth as they gaze with love at their masters. On, then,
strode Orpheus, playing still, and the melody he drew from his lute
passed before him into the realms of Pluto.

Surely never were heard such strains. They told of perfect, tender
love, of unending longing, of pain too great to end with death. Of all
the beauties of the earth they sang--of the sorrow of the world--of
all the world's desire--of things past--of things to come. And ever,
through the song that the lute sang, there came, like a thread of
silver that is woven in a black velvet pall, a limpid melody. It was
as though a bird sang in the mirk night, and it spoke of peace and of
hope, and of joy that knows no ending.

Into the blackest depths of Hades the sounds sped on their way, and
the hands of Time stood still. From his bitter task of trying to quaff
the stream that ever receded from the parched and burning lips,
Tantalus ceased for a moment. The ceaseless course of Ixion's wheel
was stayed, the vulture's relentless beak no longer tore at the
Titan's liver; Sisyphus gave up his weary task of rolling the stone
and sat on the rock to listen, the Dana√Ødes rested from their labour
of drawing water in a sieve. For the first time, the cheeks of the
Furies were wet with tears, and the restless shades that came and went
in the darkness, like dead autumn leaves driven by a winter gale,
stood still to gaze and listen. Before the throne where Pluto and his
queen Proserpine were seated, sable-clad and stern, the relentless
Fates at their feet, Orpheus still played on. And to Proserpine then
came the living remembrance of all the joys of her girlhood by the
blue √Ügean Sea in the fair island of Sicily. Again she knew the
fragrance and the beauty of the flowers of spring. Even into Hades the
scent of the violets seemed to come, and fresh in her heart was the
sorrow that had been hers on the day on which the ruthless King of
Darkness tore her from her mother and from all that she held most
dear. Silent she sat beside her frowning, stern-faced lord, but her
eyes grew dim.

When, with a quivering sigh, the music stopped, Orpheus fearlessly
pled his cause. To let him have Eurydice, to give him back his more
than life, to grant that he might lead her with him up to "the light
of Heaven"--that was his prayer.

The eyes of Pluto and Proserpine did not dare to meet, yet with one
accord was their answer given. Eurydice should be given back to him,
but only on one condition. Not until he had reached the light of earth
again was he to turn round and look upon the face for a sight of which
his eyes were tired with longing. Eagerly Orpheus complied, and with a
heart almost breaking with gladness he heard the call for Eurydice and
turned to retrace his way, with the light footfall of the little feet
that he adored making music behind him. Too good a thing it
seemed--too unbelievable a joy. She was there--quite close to him.
Their days of happiness were not ended. His love had won her back,
even from the land of darkness. All that he had not told her of that
love while yet she was on earth he would tell her now. All that he had
failed in before, he would make perfect now. The little limping
foot--how it made his soul overflow with adoring tenderness. So near
she was, he might even touch her were he to stretch back his hand....

And then there came to him a hideous doubt. What if Pluto had played
him false? What if there followed him not Eurydice, but a mocking
shade? As he climbed the steep ascent that led upwards to the light,
his fear grew more cruelly real. Almost he could imagine that her
footsteps had stopped, that when he reached the light he would find
himself left once more to his cruel loneliness. Too overwhelming for
him was the doubt. So nearly there they were that the darkness was no
longer that of night, but as that of evening when the long shadows
fall upon the land, and there seemed no reason for Orpheus to wait.

Swiftly he turned, and found his wife behind him, but only for a
moment she stayed. Her arms were thrown open and Orpheus would fain
have grasped her in his own, but before they could touch each other
Eurydice was borne from him, back into the darkness.

"Farewell!" she said--"Farewell!" and her voice was a sigh of hopeless
grief. In mad desperation Orpheus sought to follow her, but his
attempt was vain. At the brink of the dark, fierce-flooded Acheron the
boat with its boatman, old Charon, lay ready to ferry across to the
further shore those whose future lay in the land of Shades. To him ran
Orpheus, in clamorous anxiety to undo the evil he had wrought. But
Charon angrily repulsed him. There was no place for such as Orpheus in
his ferry-boat. Those only who went, never to return, could find a
passage there. For seven long days and seven longer nights Orpheus
waited beside the river, hoping that Charon would relent, but at last
hope died, and he sought the depths of the forests of Thrace, where
trees and rocks and beasts and birds were all his friends.

He took his lyre again then and played:

    "Such strains as would have won the ear
    Of Pluto, to have quite set free
    His half-regained Eurydice."

        Milton.

Day and night he stayed in the shadow of the woodlands, all the sorrow
of his heart expressing itself in the song of his lute. The fiercest
beasts of the forest crawled to his feet and looked up at him with
eyes full of pity. The song of the birds ceased, and when the wind
moaned through the trees they echoed his cry, "Eurydice! Eurydice!"

In the dawning hours it would seem to him that he saw her again,
flitting, a thing of mist and rising sun, across the dimness of the
woods. And when evening came and all things rested, and the night
called out the mystery of the forest, again he would see her. In the
long blue shadows of the trees she would stand--up the woodland paths
she walked, where her little feet fluttered the dry leaves as she
passed. Her face was white as a lily in the moonlight, and ever she
held out her arms to Orpheus:

    "At that elm-vista's end I trace,
    Dimly thy sad leave-taking face,
    Eurydice! Eurydice!
    The tremulous leaves repeat to me
    Eurydice! Eurydice!"

        Lowell.

[Illustration: SWIFTLY HE TURNED, AND FOUND HIS WIFE BEHIND HIM]

For Orpheus it was a good day when Jason, chief of the Argonauts,
sought him out to bid him come with the other heroes and aid in the
quest of the Golden Fleece.

"Have I not had enough of toil and of weary wandering far and wide,"
sighed Orpheus. "In vain is the skill of the voice which my goddess
mother gave me; in vain have I sung and laboured; in vain I went down
to the dead, and charmed all the kings of Hades, to win back Eurydice,
my bride. For I won her, my beloved, and lost her again the same day,
and wandered away in my madness even to Egypt and the Libyan sands,
and the isles of all the seas.... While I charmed in vain the hearts
of men, and the savage forest beasts, and the trees, and the lifeless
stones, with my magic harp and song, giving rest, but finding
none."[3]

But in the good ship _Argo_, Orpheus took his place with the others
and sailed the watery ways, and the songs that Orpheus sang to his
shipmates and that tell of all their great adventures are called the
Songs of Orpheus, or the Orphics, to this day.

Many were the mishaps and disasters that his music warded off. With it
he lulled monsters to sleep; more powerful to work magic on the hearts
of men were his melodies than were the songs of the sirens when they
tried to capture the Argonauts by their wiles, and in their downward,
destroying rush his music checked mountains.

When the quest of the Argonauts was ended, Orpheus returned to his own
land of Thrace. As a hero he had fought and endured hardship, but his
wounded soul remained unhealed. Again the trees listened to the songs
of longing. Again they echoed, "Eurydice! Eurydice!"

As he sat one day near a river in the stillness of the forest, there
came from afar an ugly clamour of sound. It struck against the music
of Orpheus' lute and slew it, as the coarse cries of the screaming
gulls that fight for carrion slay the song of a soaring lark. It was
the day of the feast of Bacchus, and through the woods poured Bacchus
and his Bacchantes, a shameless rout, satyrs capering around them,
centaurs neighing aloud. Long had the Bacchantes hated the loyal
poet-lover of one fair woman whose dwelling was with the Shades. His
ears were ever deaf to their passionate voices, his eyes blind to
their passionate loveliness as they danced through the green trees, a
riot of colour, of fierce beauty, of laughter and of mad song. Mad
they were indeed this day, and in their madness the very existence of
Orpheus was a thing not to be borne. At first they stoned him, but his
music made the stones fall harmless at his feet. Then in a frenzy of
cruelty, with the maniac lust to cause blood to flow, to know the joy
of taking life, they threw themselves upon Orpheus and did him to
death. From limb to limb they tore him, casting at last his head and
his blood-stained lyre into the river. And still, as the water bore
them on, the lyre murmured its last music and the white lips of
Orpheus still breathed of her whom at last he had gone to join in the
shadowy land, "Eurydice! Eurydice!"

"Combien d'autres sont morts de m√™me! C'est la lutte √©ternelle de la
force brutale contre l'intelligence douce et sublime inspir√©e du ciel,
dont le royaume n'est pas de ce monde."

In the heavens, as a bright constellation called Lyra, or Orpheus, the
gods placed his lute, and to the place of his martyrdom came the
Muses, and with loving care carried the fragments of the massacred
body to Libetlera, at the foot of Mount Olympus, and there buried
them. And there, unto this day, more sweetly than at any other spot in
any other land, the nightingale sings. For it sings of a love that
knows no ending, of life after death, of a love so strong that it can
conquer even Death, the all-powerful.


FOOTNOTE:

[3] Kingsley.




APOLLO AND DAPHNE


Conqueror of all conquerable earth, yet not always victorious over the
heart of a maid was the golden-locked Apollo.

As mischievous Eros played one day with his bow and arrows, Apollo
beheld him and spoke to him mockingly.

"What hast thou to do with the weapons of war, saucy lad?" he said.
"Leave them for hands such as mine, that know full well how to wield
them. Content thyself with thy torch, and kindle flames, if indeed
thou canst, but such bolts as thy white young arms can drive will
surely not bring scathe to god nor to man."

Then did the son of Aphrodite answer, and as he made answer he laughed
aloud in his glee. "With thine arrows thou mayst strike all things
else, great Apollo, a shaft of mine shall surely strike thy heart!"

Carefully, then, did Eros choose two arrows from his quiver. One,
sharp-pointed and of gold, he fitted carefully to his bow, drew back
the string until it was taut, and then let fly the arrow, that did not
miss its mark, but flew straight to the heart of the sun-god. With the
other arrow, blunt, and tipped with lead, he smote the beautiful
Daphne, daughter of Peneus, the river-god. And then, full joyously did
the boy-god laugh, for his roguish heart knew well that to him who
was struck by the golden shaft must come the last pangs that have
proved many a man's and many a god's undoing, while that leaden-tipped
arrow meant to whomsoever it struck, a hatred of Love and an immunity
from all the heart weakness that Love can bring. Those were the days
when Apollo was young. Never before had he loved.

But as the first fierce storm that assails it bends the young, supple
tree with its green budding leaves before its furious blast, so did
the first love of Apollo bend low his adoring heart. All day as he
held the golden reins of his chariot, until evening when its fiery
wheels were cooled in the waters of the western seas, he thought of
Daphne. All night he dreamed of her. But never did there come to
Daphne a time when she loved Love for Love's sake. Never did she look
with gentle eye on the golden-haired god whose face was as the face of
all the exquisite things that the sunlight shows, remembered in a
dream. Her only passion was a passion for the chase. One of Diana's
nymphs was she, cold and pure and white in soul as the virgin goddess
herself.

There came a day when Apollo could no longer put curbing hands on his
fierce longing. The flames from his chariot still lingered in
reflected glories on sea and hill and sky. The very leaves of the
budding trees of spring were outlined in gold. And through the dim
wood walked Daphne, erect and lithe and living as a sapling in the
early spring.

With beseeching hands, Apollo followed her. A god was he, yet to him
had come the vast humility of passionate intercession for the gift of
love to a little nymph. She heard his steps behind her and turned
round, proud and angry that one should follow her when she had not
willed it.

"Stay!" he said, "daughter of Peneus. No foe am I, but thine own
humble lover. To thee alone do I bow my head. To all others on earth
am I conqueror and king."

But Daphne, hating his words of passionate love, sped on. And when his
passion lent wings to his feet and she heard him gaining on her as she
fled, not as a lover did Daphne look on deathless Apollo, but as a
hateful foe. More swiftly than she had ever run beside her mistress
Diana, leaving the flying winds behind her as she sped, ran Daphne
now. But ever did Apollo gain upon her, and almost had he grasped her
when she reached the green banks of the river of which her father,
Peneus, was god.

"Help me, Peneus!" she cried. "Save me, oh my father, from him whose
love I fear!"

As she spoke the arms of Apollo seized her, yet, even as his arms met
around her waist, lissome and slight as a young willow, Daphne the
nymph was Daphne the nymph no longer. Her fragrant hair, her soft
white arms, her tender body all changed as the sun-god touched them.
Her feet took root in the soft, damp earth by the river. Her arms
sprouted into woody branches and green leaves. Her face vanished, and
the bark of a big tree enclosed her snow-white body. Yet Apollo did
not take away his embrace from her who had been his dear first love.
He knew that her cry to Peneus her father had been answered, yet he
said, "Since thou canst not be my bride, at least thou shalt be my
tree; my hair, my lyre, my quiver shall have thee always, oh laurel
tree of the Immortals!"

So do we still speak of laurels won, and worn by those of deathless
fame, and still does the first love of Apollo crown the heads of those
whose gifts have fitted them to dwell with the dwellers on Olympus.

                "I espouse thee for my tree:
    Be thou the prize of honour and renown;
    The deathless poet, and the poem, crown;
    Thou shalt the Roman festivals adorn,
    And, after poets, be by victors worn."

        Ovid (_Dryden's translation_).




PSYCHE


Those who read for the first time the story of Psyche must at once be
struck by its kinship to the fairy tales of childhood. Here we have
the three sisters, the two elder jealous and spiteful, the youngest
beautiful and gentle and quite unable to defend herself against her
sisters' wicked arts. Here, too, is the mysterious bridegroom who is
never seen and who is lost to his bride because of her lack of faith.
Truly it is an old, old tale--older than all fairy tales--the story of
love that is not strong enough to believe and to wait, and so to "win
through" in the end--the story of seeds of suspicion sown by one full
of malice in an innocent heart, and which bring to the hapless reaper
a cruel harvest.

Once upon a time, so goes the tale, a king and queen had three
beautiful daughters. The first and the second were fair indeed, but
the beauty of the youngest was such that all the people of the land
worshipped it as a thing sent straight from Olympus. They awaited her
outside the royal palace, and when she came, they threw chaplets of
roses and violets for her little feet to tread upon, and sang hymns of
praise as though she were no mortal maiden but a daughter of the
deathless gods.

There were many who said that the beauty of Aphrodite herself was less
perfect than the beauty of Psyche, and when the goddess found that men
were forsaking her altars in order to worship a mortal maiden, great
was her wrath against them and against the princess who, all
unwittingly, had wrought her this shameful harm.

In her garden, sitting amongst the flowers and idly watching his
mother's fair white doves as they preened their snowy feathers in the
sun, Aphrodite found her son Eros, and angrily poured forth to him the
story of her shame.

"Thine must be the task of avenging thy mother's honour," she said.
"Thou who hast the power of making the loves of men, stab with one of
thine arrows the heart of this presumptuous maiden, and shame her
before all other mortals by making her love a monster from which all
others shrink and which all despise." With wicked glee Eros heard his
mother's commands. His beautiful face, still the face of a mischievous
boy, lit up with merriment. This was, in truth, a game after his own
heart. In the garden of Aphrodite is a fountain of sweet, another of
bitter water, and Eros filled two amber vases, one from each fountain,
hung them from his quiver, and

    "Straight he rose from earth and down the wind
    Went glittering 'twixt the blue sky and the sea."

In her chamber Psyche lay fast asleep, and swiftly, almost without a
glance at her, Eros sprinkled some of the bitter drops upon her lips,
and then, with one of his sharpest arrows, pricked her snowy breast.
Like a child who half awakes in fear, and looks up with puzzled,
wondering eyes, Psyche, with a little moan, opened eyes that were
bluer than the violets in spring and gazed at Eros. He knew that he
was invisible, and yet her gaze made him tremble.

"They spoke truth!" said the lad to himself. "Not even my mother is as
fair as this princess."

For a moment her eyelids quivered, and then dropped. Her long dark
lashes fell on her cheeks that were pink as the hearts of the fragile
shells that the waves toss up on western beaches, her red mouth,
curved like the bow of Eros, smiled happily, and Psyche slept again.
With heart that beat as it had never beaten before, Eros gazed upon
her perfect loveliness. With gentle, pitying finger he wiped away the
red drop where his arrow had wounded her, and then stooped and touched
her lips with his own, so lightly that Psyche in her dreams thought
that they had been brushed by a butterfly's wings. Yet in her sleep
she moved, and Eros, starting back, pricked himself with one of his
arrows. And with that prick, for Eros there passed away all the
careless ease of the heart of a boy, and he knew that he loved Psyche
with the unquenchable love of a deathless god. Now, with bitter
regret, all his desire was to undo the wrong he had done to the one
that he loved. Speedily he sprinkled her with the sweet water that
brings joy, and when Psyche rose from her couch she was radiant with
the beauty that comes from a new, undreamed-of happiness.

    "From place to place Love followed her that day
    And ever fairer to his eyes she grew,
    So that at last when from her bower he flew,
    And underneath his feet the moonlit sea
    Went shepherding his waves disorderly,
    He swore that of all gods and men, no one
    Should hold her in his arms but he alone;
    That she should dwell with him in glorious wise
    Like to a goddess in some paradise;
    Yea, he would get from Father Jove this grace
    That she should never die, but her sweet face
    And wonderful fair body should endure
    Till the foundations of the mountains sure
    Were molten in the sea; so utterly
    Did he forget his mother's cruelty."

        William Morris.

Meantime it came to be known all over that land, and in other lands to
which the fame of the fair Psyche had spread, that the mighty goddess
Aphrodite had declared herself the enemy of the princess. Therefore
none dared seek her in marriage, and although many a noble youth
sighed away his heart for love of her, she remained in her father's
palace like an exquisite rose whose thorns make those who fain would
have it for their own, fear to pluck it from the parent stem. Her
sisters married, and her father marvelled why so strange a thing
should come about and why the most beautiful by far of his three
daughters should remain unwed.

At length, laden with royal gifts, an embassy was sent by the king to
the oracle of Apollo to inquire what might be the will of the dwellers
on Olympus concerning his fairest daughter. In a horror of anxiety the
king and his queen and Psyche awaited the return of the ambassadors.
And when they returned, before ever a word was spoken, they knew that
the oracle had spoken Psyche's doom.

"No mortal lover shall fair Psyche know," said the oracle. "For
bridegroom she shall have a monster that neither man nor god can
resist. On the mountain top he awaits her coming. Woe unutterable
shall come to the king and to all the dwellers in his land if he dares
to resist the unalterable dictum of the deathless gods!"

    "... Of dead corpses shalt thou be the king,
    And stumbling through the dark land shalt thou go,
    Howling for second death to end thy woe."

        William Morris.

Only for a little while did the wretched king strive to resist the
decrees of fate. And in her own chamber, where so short a time before the
little princess had known the joy of something inexpressible--something
most exquisite--intangible--unknown--she sat, like a flower broken by the
ruthless storm, sobbing pitifully, dry-eyed, with sobs that strained her
soul, for the shameful, hideous fate that the gods had dealt her.

All night, until her worn-out body could no longer feel, her worn-out
mind think, and kind sleep came to bring her oblivion, Psyche faced
the horror for the sake of her father and of his people, that she knew
she could not avoid. When morning came, her handmaids, white-faced and
red-eyed, came to deck her in all the bridal magnificence that
befitted the most beautiful daughter of a king, and when she was
dressed right royally, and as became a bride, there started up the
mountain a procession at sight of which the gods themselves must have
wept. With bowed heads the king and queen walked before the litter
upon which lay their daughter in her marriage veil of saffron colour,
with rose wreath on her golden hair. White, white were the faces of
the maidens who bore the torches, and yet rose red were they by the
side of Psyche. Minstrels played wedding hymns as they marched
onwards, and it seemed as though the souls of unhappy shades sobbed
through the reeds and moaned through the strings as they played.

At length they reached the rocky place where they knew they must leave
the victim bride, and her father dared not meet her eyes as he turned
his head to go. Yet Psyche watched the procession wending its way
downhill. No more tears had she to shed, and it seemed to her that
what she saw was not a wedding throng, but an assembly of
broken-hearted people who went back to their homes with heavy feet
after burying one that they loved. She saw no sign of the monster who
was to be her bridegroom, yet at every little sound her heart grew
sick with horror, and when the night wind swept through the craggy
peaks and its moans were echoed in loneliness, she fell on her face in
deadly fear and lay on the cold rock in a swoon.

Yet, had Psyche known it, the wind was her friend. For Eros had used
Zephyrus as his trusty messenger and sent him to the mountain top to
find the bride of him "whom neither man nor god could resist."
Tenderly--very tenderly--he was told, must he lift her in his arms,
and bear her to the golden palace in that green and pleasant land
where Eros had his home. So, with all the gentleness of a loving nurse
to a tired little child Zephyrus lifted Psyche, and sped with her in
his strong arms to the flowery meadows behind which towered the golden
palace of Eros, like the sun behind a sky of green and amber and blue
and rose. Deeply, in the weariness of her grief, Psyche slept, and
when she awoke it was to start up with the chill hands of the
realisation of terrible actualities on her heart. But when her eyes
looked round to find the barren rocks, the utter forsakenness, the
coming of an unnameable horror, before her she saw only fair groves
with trees bedecked with fruit and blossom, fragrant meadows, flowers
whose beauty made her eyes grow glad. And from the trees sang birds
with song more sweet than any that Psyche had ever known, and with
brilliant plumage which they preened caressingly when they had dipped
their wings in crystal-sparkling fountains. There, too, stood a noble
palace, golden fronted, and with arcades of stainless marble that
shone like snow in the sun. At first all seemed like part of a dream
from which she dreaded to awake, but soon there came to her the joy of
knowing that all the exquisite things that made appeal to her senses
were indeed realities. Almost holding her breath, she walked forward
to the open golden doors. "It is a trap," she thought. "By this means
does the monster subtly mean to lure me into his golden cage." Yet,
even as she thought, there seemed to be hovering round her winged
words, like little golden birds with souls. And in her ears they
whispered, "Fear not. Doubt not. Recall the half-formed dreams that so
short a time ago brought to thy heart such unutterable joy. No evil
shall come to thee--only the bliss of loving and of being loved."

[Illustration: THUS DID PSYCHE LOSE HER FEAR, AND ENTER THE GOLDEN
DOORS]

Thus did Psyche lose her fear, and enter the golden doors. And
inside the palace she found that all the beautiful things of which she
had ever dreamed, all the perfect things for which she had ever
longed, were there to greet her. From one to another she flitted, like
a humming-bird that sucks honey from one and then from another
gorgeous flower. And then, when she was tired with so much wearing out
of her thankful mind, she found a banquet ready spread for her, with
all the dainties that her dainty soul liked best; and, as she ate,
music so perfect rejoiced her ears that all her soul was soothed and
joyous and at peace. When she had refreshed herself, a soft couch
stood before her, ready for her there to repose, and when that strange
day had come to an end, Psyche knew that, monster or not, she was
beloved by one who had thought for her every thought, and who desired
only her desire.

Night came at last, and when all was dark and still, and Psyche, wide
awake, was full of forebodings and fears lest her happy dreams might
only be misleading fancies, and Horror incarnate might come to crown
her peaceful day, Eros softly entered the palace that was his own.
Even as he had gone to the palace of her father he went now, and found
Psyche lying with violet eyes that stared into the velvety darkness,
seeking something that she hoped for, trembling before something that
brought her dread.

His voice was as the voice of spring when it breathes on the sleeping
earth; he knew each note in Love's music, every word in the great
thing that is Love's vocabulary. Love loved, and Psyche listened, and
soon she knew that her lover was Love himself.

Thus, for Psyche, did a time of perfect happiness begin. All through
the day she roamed in her Love's dominion, and saw on every side the
signs of his passion and of his tenderness. All through the night he
stayed by her, and satisfied all the longing of her heart. Yet always,
ere daybreak, Eros left her, and when she begged him to stay he only
made answer:

    "I am with thee only while I keep
    My visage hidden; and if thou once shouldst see
    My face, I must forsake thee; the high gods
    Link Love with Faith, and he withdraws himself
    From the full gaze of knowledge."

        Lewis Morris.

So did time glide past for Psyche, and ever she grew more in love with
Love; always did her happiness become more complete. Yet, ever and
again, there returned to her the remembrance of those sorrowful days
when her father and mother had broken their hearts over her martyrdom,
and her sisters had looked askance at her as at one whose punishment
must assuredly have come from her own misdoing. Thus at length she
asked Eros to grant her, for love's sake, a boon--to permit her to
have her sisters come to see for themselves the happiness that was
hers. Most unwillingly was her request granted, for the heart of Eros
told him that from their visit no good could come. Yet he was unable
to deny anything to Psyche, and on the following day Zephyrus was sent
to bring the two sisters to the pleasant valley where Psyche had her
home. Eagerly, as she awaited them, Psyche thought she might make the
princely palace wherein she dwelt yet fairer than it was. And almost
ere she could think, her thoughts became realities. When the two
sisters came, they were bewildered with the beauty and the
magnificence of it all. Beside this, their own possessions were paltry
trifles indeed. Quickly, in their little hearts, black envy grew. They
had always been jealous of their younger sister, and now that they
found her, whom all the world believed to have been slain by a
horrible monster, more beautiful than ever, decked with rare jewels,
radiant in her happiness, and queen of a palace fit for the gods,
their envy soon turned to hatred, and they sought how best to wreak
their malice upon the joyous creature who loaded them with priceless
gifts. They began to ply Psyche with questions. He who was her lord,
to whom she owed all her happiness, where was he? Why did he stay away
when her sisters came to be presented to him? What manner of man was
he? Was he fair or dark? Young or old? And as they questioned her,
Psyche grew like a bewildered child and answered in frightened words
that contradicted one another. And well the wicked sisters, who
brooded evil in their hearts, knew that this husband whom Psyche had
never seen must indeed be one of the deathless gods. Wily words they
spoke to her then.

"Alas! unhappy one," they said, "dost think to escape the evil fate
the gods meted out for thee? Thy husband is none other than the
monster of which the oracle spake! Oh, foolish Psyche! canst not
understand that the monster fears the light? Too great horror would
it mean for thee to see the loathsome thing that comes in the
blackness of night and speaks to thee words of love."

White-lipped and trembling, Psyche listened. Drop by drop the
poisonous words passed into her soul. She had thought him king of all
living things--worthy to rule over gods as well as men. She was so
sure that his body was worthy sheath for the heart she knew so
well.... She had pictured him beautiful as Eros, son of
Aphrodite--young and fair, with crisp, golden locks--a husband to
glory in--a lover to adore. And now she knew, with shame and dread,
that he who had won her love between the twilight and the dawn was a
thing to shame her, a monster to be shunned of men.

"What, then, shall I do?" piteously she asked of her sisters. And the
women, pitilessly, and well content, answered:

"Provide thyself with a lamp and a knife sharp enough to slay the man
or monster. And when this creature to whom, to thy undying shame, thou
belongest, sleeps sound, slip from thy couch and in the rays of the
lamp have courage to look upon him in all his horror. Then, when thou
hast seen for thyself that what we say is truth, with thy knife
swiftly slay him. Thus shalt thou free thyself from the pitiless doom
meted out by the gods."

Shaking with sobs, Psyche made answer:

"I love him so!... I love him so!"

And her sisters turned upon her with furious scorn and well-simulated
wrath.

"Shameless one!" they cried; "and does our father's daughter confess
to a thing so unutterable! Only by slaying the monster canst thou hope
to regain thy place amongst the daughters of men."

They left her when evening fell, carrying with them their royal gifts.
And while she awaited the coming of her lord, Psyche, provided with
knife and lamp, crouched with her head in her hands, a lily broken by
a cruel storm. So glad was Eros to come back to her, to find her
safely there--for greatly had he feared the coming of that treacherous
pair--that he did not note her silence. Nor did the dark night show
him that her eyes in her sad face looked like violets in a snow
wreath. He wanted only to hold her safely in his arms, and there she
lay, passive and still, until sleep came to lay upon him an omnipotent
hand. Then, very gently, she withdrew herself from his embrace, and
stole to the place where her lamp was hidden. Her limbs shook under
her as she brought it to the couch where he lay asleep; her arm
trembled as she held it aloft.

As a martyr walks to death, so did she walk. And when the yellow light
fell upon the form of him who lay there, still she gazed steadily.

And, lo, before her she saw the form of him who had ever been the
ideal of her dreams. Love himself, incarnate Love, perfect in beauty
and in all else was he whom her sisters had told her was a
monster--he, of whom the oracle had said that neither gods nor men
could resist him. For a moment of perfect happiness she gazed upon his
beauty. Then he turned in his sleep, and smiled, and stretched out
his arms to find the one of his love. And Psyche started, and,
starting, shook the lamp; and from it fell a drop of burning oil on
the white shoulder of Eros. At once he awoke, and with piteous,
pitying eyes looked in those of Psyche. And when he spoke, his words
were like daggers that pierced deep into her soul. He told her all
that had been, all that might have been. Had she only had faith and
patience to wait, an immortal life should have been hers.

    "Farewell! though I, a god, can never know
    How thou canst lose thy pain, yet time will go
    Over thine head, and thou mayst mingle yet
    The bitter and the sweet, nor quite forget,
    Nor quite remember, till these things shall seem
    The wavering memory of a lovely dream."

        William Morris.

He left her alone then, with her despair, and as the slow hours
dragged by, Psyche, as she awaited the dawn, felt that in her heart no
sun could ever rise again. When day came at last, she felt she could
no longer endure to stay in the palace where everything spoke to her
of the infinite tenderness of a lost love. Through the night a storm
had raged, and even with the day there came no calm. And Psyche, weary
and chill, wandered away from the place of her happiness, onward and
ever on, until she stood on the bank of a swift-flowing river. For a
little she stayed her steps and listened to the sound of its wash
against the rocks and tree roots as it hurried past, and to her as she
waited came the thought that here had she found a means by which to
end her woe.

"I have lost my Love," she moaned. "What is Life to me any longer!
Come to me then, O Death!"

So then she sprang into the wan water, hoping that very swiftly it
might bear her grief-worn soul down to the shades. But the river bore
her up and carried her to its shallows in a fair meadow where Pan
himself sat on the bank and merrily dabbled his feet in the flowing
water. And when Psyche, shamed and wet, looked at him with sad eyes,
the god spoke to her gently and chid her for her folly. She was too
young and much too fair to try to end her life so rudely, he said. The
river gods would never be so unkind as to drive so beautiful a maiden
in rough haste down to the Cocytus valley.

"Thou must dree thy weird like all other daughters of men, fair
Psyche," he said. "He or she who fain would lose their lives, are ever
held longest in life. Only when the gods will it shall thy days on
earth be done."

And Psyche, knowing that in truth the gods had spared her to endure
more sorrow, looked in his face with a very piteous gaze, and wandered
on. As she wandered, she found that her feet had led her near the
place where her two sisters dwelt.

"I shall tell them of the evil they have wrought," she thought.
"Surely they must sorrow when they know that by their cruel words they
stole my faith from me and robbed me of my Love and of my happiness."

Gladly the two women saw the stricken form of Psyche and looked at her
face, all marred by grief. Well, indeed, had their plot succeeded;
their malice had drunk deep, yet deeper still they drank, for with
scornful laughter they drove her from their palace doors. Very
quickly, when she had gone, the elder sought the place where she had
stood when Zephyrus bore her in safety to that palace of pleasure
where Psyche dwelt with her Love. Now that Psyche was no longer there,
surely the god by whom she had been beloved would gladly have as her
successor the beautiful woman who was now much more fair than the
white-faced girl with eyes all red with weeping. And such certainty
did the vengeful gods put in her heart that she held out her arms, and
calling aloud:

"Bear me to him in thine arms, Zephyrus! Behold I come, my lord!" she
sprang from the high cliff on which she stood, into space. And the
ravens that night feasted on her shattered body. So also did it befall
the younger sister, deluded by the Olympians to her own destruction,
so that her sin might be avenged.

For many a weary day and night Psyche wandered, ever seeking to find
her Love, ever longing to do something by which to atone for the deed
that had been her undoing. From temple to temple she went, but nowhere
did she come near him, until at length in Cyprus she came to the place
where Aphrodite herself had her dwelling. And inasmuch as her love had
made her very bold, and because she no longer feared death, nor could
think of pangs more cruel than those that she already knew, Psyche
sought the presence of the goddess who was her enemy, and humbly
begged her to take her life away.

With flaming scorn and anger Aphrodite received her.

    "O thou fool," she said, "I will not let thee die!
    But thou shalt reap the harvest thou hast sown,
    And many a day that wretched lot bemoan;
    Thou art my slave, and not a day shall be
    But I will find some fitting task for thee."

There began then for Psyche a time of torturing misery of which only
those could speak who have knowledge of the merciless stripes with
which the goddess can scourge the hearts of her slaves. With cruel
ingenuity, Aphrodite invented labours for her.

In uncountable quantity, and mingled in inextricable and bewildering
confusion, there lay in the granary of the goddess grains of barley
and of wheat, peas and millet, poppy and coriander seed. To sort out
each kind and lay them in heaps was the task allotted for one day, and
woe be to her did she fail. In despair, Psyche began her hopeless
labour. While the sun shone, through a day that was for her too short,
she strove to separate the grains, but when the shadows of evening
made it hard for her to distinguish one sort from another, only a few
very tiny piles were the result of her weary toil. Very soon the
goddess would return, and Psyche dared not think what would be the
punishment meted out to her. Rapidly the darkness fell, but while the
dying light still lingered in some parts of the granary, it seemed to
Psyche as though little dark trickles of water began to pour from
underneath the doors and through the cracks in the wall. Trembling she
watched the ceaseless motion of those long, dark lines, and then, in
amazement, realised that what she saw were unending processions of
ants. And as though one who loved her directed their labours, the
millions of busy little toilers swiftly did for Psyche what she
herself had failed to do. When at length they went away, in those long
dark lines that looked like the flow of a thread-like stream, the
grains were all piled up in high heaps, and the sad heart of Psyche
knew not only thankful relief, but had a thrill of gladness.

"Eros sent them to me:" she thought. "Even yet his love for me is not
dead."

And what she thought was true.

Amazed and angry, Aphrodite looked at the task she had deemed
impossible, well and swiftly performed. That Psyche should possess
such magic skill only incensed her more, and next day she said to her
new slave:

"Behold, on the other side of that glittering stream, my
golden-fleeced sheep crop the sweet flowers of the meadow. To-day must
thou cross the river and bring me back by evening a sample of wool
pulled from each one of their shining fleeces."

Then did Psyche go down to the brink of the river, and even as her
white feet splashed into the water, she heard a whisper of warning
from the reeds that bowed their heads by the stream.

"Beware! O Psyche," they said. "Stay on the shore and rest until the
golden-fleeced sheep lie under the shade of the trees in the evening
and the murmur of the river has lulled them to sleep."

But Psyche said, "Alas, I must do the bidding of the goddess. It will
take me many a weary hour to pluck the wool that she requires."

And again the reeds murmured, "Beware! for the golden-fleeced sheep,
with their great horns, are evil creatures that lust for the lives of
mortals, and will slay thee even as thy feet reach the other bank.
Only when the sun goes down does their vice depart from them, and
while they sleep thou canst gather of their wool from the bushes and
from the trunks of the trees."

And again the heart of Psyche felt a thrill of happiness, because she
knew that she was loved and cared for still. All day she rested in the
wood by the river and dreamt pleasant day-dreams, and when the sun had
set she waded to the further shore and gathered the golden wool in the
way that the reeds had told her. When in the evening she came to the
goddess, bearing her shining load, the brow of Aphrodite grew dark.

"If thou art so skilled in magic that no danger is danger to thee, yet
another task shall I give thee that is worthy of thy skill," she said,
and laid upon Psyche her fresh commands.

Sick with dread, Psyche set out next morning to seek the black stream
out of which Aphrodite had commanded her to fill a ewer. Part of its
waters flowed into the Styx, part into the Cocytus, and well did
Psyche know that a hideous death from the loathly creatures that
protected the fountain must be the fate of those who risked so proud
an attempt. Yet because she knew that she must "dree her weird," as
Pan had said, she plodded onward, towards that dark mountain from
whose side gushed the black water that she sought. And then, once
again, there came to her a message of love. A whirring of wings she
heard, and

    "O'er her head there flew the bird of Jove,
    The bearer, of his servant, friend of Love,
    Who, when he saw her, straightway towards her flew,
    And asked her why she wept, and when he knew,
    And who she was, he said, 'Cease all thy fear,
    For to the black waves I thy ewer will bear,
    And fill it for thee; but, remember me,
    When thou art come unto thy majesty.'"

And, yet once again, the stricken heart of Psyche was gladdened, and
when at nightfall she came with her ewer full of water from the dread
stream and gave it to Aphrodite, although she knew that a yet more
arduous task was sure to follow, her fear had all passed away.

With beautiful, sullen eyes, Aphrodite received her when she brought
the water. And, with black brow, she said: "If thou art so skilled in
magic that no danger is known to thee, I shall now give thee a task
all worthy of thy skill."

Thereon she told her that she must seek that dark valley where no
silver nor golden light ever strikes on the black waters of Cocytus
and of the Styx; and where Pluto reigns in gloomy majesty over the
restless shades. From Proserpine she was to crave for Aphrodite the
gift of a box of magical ointment, the secret of which was known to
the Queen of Darkness alone, and which was able to bring to those who
used it, beauty more exquisite than any that the eyes of gods or of
men had as yet looked upon.

"I grow weary and careworn," said Aphrodite, and she looked like a
rose that has budded in Paradise as she spoke. "My son was wounded by
a faithless slave in whom, most weakly, he put his trust, and in
tending to his wound, my beauty has faded."

And at these scornful words, the heart of Psyche leaped within her.

"In helping his mother, I shall help him!" she thought. And again she
thought, "I shall atone." And so, when day was come, she took her way
along the weary road that leads to that dark place from whence no
traveller can ever hope to return, and still with gladness in her
heart. But, as she went onward, "cold thoughts and dreadful fears"
came to her.

"Better were it for me to hasten my journey to the shades," she
thought.

And when she came to an old grey tower, that seemed like an old man
that Death has forgotten, she resolved to throw herself down from it,
and thus swiftly to find herself at her journey's end. But as she
stood on the top of the tower, her arms outstretched, like a white
butterfly that poises its wings for flight, a voice spoke in her ear.

"Oh, foolish one," it said, "why dost thou strive to stay the hope
that is not dead?" And while she held her breath, her great eyes wide
open, the voice spoke on, and told her by what means she might
speedily reach Hades and there find means to face with courage the
King of Darkness himself and his fair wife, Proserpine.

All that she was bidden to do, Psyche did, and so at last did she
come before the throne of Proserpine, and all that Psyche endured, all
that she saw, all that through which she came with bleeding heart and
yet with unscathed soul, cannot here be written.

To her Proserpine gave the box of precious ointment that Aphrodite
described, and gladly she hastened homeward. Good, indeed, it was to
her when again she reached the fair light of day. Yet, when she had
won there, there came to Psyche a winged thought, that beat against
the stern barriers of her mind like a little moth against a window.

"This ointment that I carry with me," said Psyche to herself, "is an
ointment that will bring back to those all faded by time, or worn by
suffering, a beauty greater than any beauty that has joyed the
Immortals!" And then she thought:

"For my beauty, Eros--_Love_--loved me; and now my beauty is worn and
wasted and well-nigh gone. Were I to open this box and make use of the
ointment of Proserpine, then indeed I should be fair enough to be the
bride of him who, even now, believes that he loves me--of Eros whose
love is my life!"

So it came to pass that she opened the fateful box. And out of it
there came not Beauty, but Sleep, that put his gyves upon her limbs,
and on her eyelids laid heavy fingers. And Psyche sank down by the
wayside, the prisoner of Sleep.

But Eros, who had loved her ever, with a love that knew the ebb and
flow of no tides, rose from his bed and went in search of her who had
braved even the horrors of Hades for his dear sake. And by the wayside
he found her, fettered by sleep. Her little oval face was white as a
snowdrop. Like violets were her heavy eyelids, and underneath her
sleeping eyes a violet shadow lay. Once had her mouth been as the bow
of Eros, painted in carmine. Now either end of the bow was turned
downwards, and its colour was that of a faded rose-leaf.

And as Eros looked at her that he loved, pity stirred his heart, as
the wind sweeps through the sighing, grey leaves of the willow, or
sings through the bowing reeds.

"My _Belov√®d_!" he said, and he knew that Psyche was indeed his
beloved. It was her fair soul that he loved, nor did it matter to him
whether her body was like a rose in June or as a wind-scourged tree in
December. And as his lips met hers, Psyche awoke, and heard his soft
whisper:

               "Dear, unclose thine eyes.
    Thou mayst look on me now. I go no more,
    But am thine own forever."

        Lewis Morris.

Then did there spring from the fair white shoulders of Psyche, wings
of silver and of gold, and, hand in hand with Eros, she winged her way
to Olympus.

And there all the deathless gods were assembled, and Aphrodite no
longer looked upon her who had once been her slave with darkened
brows, but smiled upon her as the sun smiles upon a new-born flower.
And when into the hand of Psyche there was placed a cup of gold, the
voice of the great Father and King of Olympus rang out loud and clear:

    "Drink now, O beautiful, and have no fear!
    For with this draught shalt thou be born again,
    And live for ever free from care and pain."

        William Morris.

In this wise did Psyche, a human soul, attain by bitter suffering to
the perfect happiness of purified love.

And still do we watch the butterfly, which is her emblem, bursting
from its ugly tomb in the dark soil, and spreading joyous white and
gold-powdered wings in the caressing sunshine, amidst the radiance and
the fragrance of the summer flowers. Still, too, do we sadly watch her
sister, the white moth, heedlessly rushing into pangs unutterable,
thoughtlessly seeking the anguish that brings her a cruel death.




THE CALYDONIAN HUNT


≈íneus and Alth√¶a were king and queen of Calydon, and to them was
born a son who was his mother's joy and yet her bitterest sorrow.
Meleager was his name, and ere his birth his mother dreamed a dream
that the child that she bore was a burning firebrand. But when the
baby came he was a royal child indeed, a little fearless king from the
first moment that his eyes, like unseeing violets, gazed steadily up
at his mother. To the chamber where he lay by his mother's side came
the three Fates, spinning, ceaselessly spinning.

"He shall be strong," said one, as she span her thread. "He shall be
fortunate and brave," said the second. But the third laid a billet of
wood on the flames, and while her withered fingers held the fatal
threads, she looked with old, old, sad eyes at the new-born child.

"To thee, O New-Born," she said, "and to this wood that burns, do we
give the same span of days to live."

From her bed sprang Alth√¶a, and, heedless of the flames, she seized
the burning wood, trod on it with her fair white feet, and poured on
it water that swiftly quenched its red glow. "Thou shalt live forever,
O Beloved," she said, "for never again shall fire char the brand that
I have plucked from the burning."

And the baby laughed.

    "Those grey women with bound hair
    Who fright the gods frighted not him; he laughed
    Seeing them, and pushed out hands to feel and haul
    Distaff and thread."

The years sped on, and from fearless and beautiful babyhood, Meleager
grew into gallant boyhood, and then into magnificent youth. When Jason
and his heroes sailed away into a distant land to win the Golden
Fleece, Meleager was one of the noble band. From all men living he won
great praise for his brave deeds, and when the tribes of the north and
west made war upon √Ütolia, he fought against their army and scattered
it as a wind in autumn drives the fallen leaves before it.

But his victory brought evil upon him. When his father ≈íneus, at
the end of a fruitful year, offered sacrifices to the gods, he omitted
to honour the goddess Diana by sacrificing to her, and to punish his
neglect, she had sent this destroying army. When Meleager was victor,
her wrath against his father grew yet more hot, and she sent a wild
boar, large as the bulls of Epirus, and fierce and savage to kill and
to devour, that it might ravage and lay waste the land of Calydon. The
fields of corn were trampled under foot, the vineyards laid waste, and
the olive groves wrecked as by a winter hurricane. Flocks and herds
were slaughtered by it, or driven hither and thither in wild panic,
working havoc as they fled. Many went out to slay it, but went only to
find a hideous death. Then did Meleager resolve that he would rid the
land of this monster, and called on all his friends, the heroes of
Greece, to come to his aid. Theseus and his friend Pirithous came;
Jason; Peleus, afterwards father of Achilles; Telamon, the father of
Ajax; Nestor, then but a youth; Castor and Pollux, and Toxeus and
Plexippus, the brothers of Alth√¶a, the fair queen-mother. But there
came none more fearless nor more ready to fight the monster boar of
Calydon than Atalanta, the daughter of the king of Arcadia. When
Atalanta was born, her father heard of her birth with anger. He
desired no daughter, but only sturdy sons who might fight for him, and
in the furious rage of bitter disappointment he had the baby princess
left on the Parthenian Hill that she might perish there. A she-bear
heard the baby's piteous cries, and carried it off to its lair, where
she suckled it along with her young, and there the little Atalanta
tumbled about and played with her furry companions and grew strong and
vigorous as any other wild young creature of the forest.

Some hunters came one day to raid the den and kill the foster-mother,
and found, amazed, a fearless, white-skinned thing with rosy cheeks
and brave eyes, who fought for her life and bit them as did her fierce
foster-brothers, and then cried human tears of rage and sorrow when
she saw the bear who had been her mother lying bloody and dead. Under
the care of the hunters Atalanta grew into a maiden, with all the
beauty of a maid and all the strength and the courage of a man. She
ran as swiftly as Zephyrus runs when he rushes up from the west and
drives the white clouds before him like a flock of timid fawns that a
hound is pursuing. The shafts that her strong arm sped from her bow
smote straight to the heart of the beast that she chased, and almost
as swift as her arrow was she there to drive her spear into her
quarry. When at length her father the king learned that the beautiful
huntress, of whom all men spoke as of one only a little lower than
Diana, was none other than his daughter, he was not slow to own her as
his child. So proud was he of her beauty and grace, and of her
marvellous swiftness of foot and skill in the chase, that he would
fain have married her to one of the great ones of Greece, but Atalanta
had consulted an oracle. "Marry not," said the oracle. "To thee
marriage must bring woe."

So, with untouched heart, and with the daring and the courage of a
young lad, Atalanta came along with the heroes to the Calydonian Hunt.
She was so radiantly lovely, so young, so strong, so courageous, that
straightway Meleager loved her, and all the heroes gazed at her with
eyes that adored her beauty. And Diana, looking down at her, also
loved the maiden whom from childhood she had held in her protection--a
gallant, fearless virgin dear to her heart.

The grey mist rose from the marshes as the hunt began, and the hunters
of the boar had gone but a little way when they came upon traces of
the hated boar. Disembowelled beasts marked its track. Here, in a
flowery meadow, had it wallowed. There, in rich wheat land, had it
routed, and the marks of its bestial tusks were on the gashed grey
trunks of the trees that had once lived in the peace of a fruitful
olive grove.

In a marsh they found their enemy, and all the reeds quivered as it
heaved its vast bulk and hove aside the weed in which it had wallowed,
and rooted with its tusks amongst the wounded water-lilies before it
leapt with a snort to meet and to slay the men who had come against
it. A filthy thing it was, as its pink snout rose above the green ooze
of the marshes, and it looked up lustingly, defying the purity of the
blue skies of heaven, to bring to those who came against it a cruel,
shameful death.

Upon it, first of all, Jason cast his spear. But the sharp point only
touched it, and unwounded, the boar rushed on, its gross, bristly head
down, to disembowel, if it could, the gallant Nestor. In the branches
of a tree Nestor found safety, and Telamon rushed on to destroy the
filthy thing that would have made carrion of the sons of the gods. A
straggling cypress root caught his fleeting foot and laid him prone, a
helpless prey for the rooting brute. His hounds fell before it, but
ere it could reach him, Atalanta, full of vengeful rage--the pure
angered against the filthy and cruel--let draw her bow, with a prayer
to Diana to guide her shaft aright. Into the boar's smoking flank sped
the arrow.

                      "The sudden string
    Rang, and sprang inward, and the waterish air
    Hissed, and the moist plumes of the songless reeds
    Moved as a wave which the wind moves no more.
    But the boar heaved half out of ooze and slime,
    His tense flank trembling round the barbed wound,
    Hateful; and fiery with invasive eyes
    And bristling with intolerable hair
    Plunged, and the hounds clung, and green flowers and white
    Reddened and broke all round them where they came.
    And charging with sheer tusk he drove, and smote
    Hyleus; and sharp death caught his sudden soul,
    And violent sleep shed night upon his eyes."

        Swinburne.

More than ever terrible was the monster now that it was wounded. One
after the other the hunters fell before its mad rage, and were sent to
the shades by a bloody and merciless death.

Before its furious charge even the heart of a hero might have been
stricken. Yet Meleager, like a mighty oak of the forest that will not
sway even a little before the rush of a storm, stood full in its way
and met its onslaught.

    "Aimed on the left side his well-handled spear
    Grasped where the ash was knottiest hewn, and smote,
    And with no missile wound, the monstrous boar
    Right in the hairiest hollow of his hide
    Under the last rib, sheer through bulk and bone,
    Deep in; and deeply smitten, and to death,
    The heavy horror with his hanging shafts,
    Leapt, and fell furiously, and from raging lips
    Foamed out the latest wrath of all his life."

Great was the shout that rose from those who still lived when that
grim hunt thus came to an end. And when, with his keen blade, Meleager
struck off the head, even as the quivering throat drew its last
agonised breath, louder still shouted the men of Greece. But not for
himself did Meleager despoil the body of his foe. He laid the ugly
thing at the feet of Atalanta.

"This is thy spoil, not mine," he said. "The wounding shaft was sped
by thee. To thee belongs the praise."

And Atalanta blushed rosily, and laughed low and gladly, not only
because Diana had heard her prayer and helped her slay the beast, but
for happiness that Meleager was so noble in his giving.

At that the brows of the heroes grew dark, and angrily one cried:

                                "Lo, now,
    Shall not the Arcadian shoot out lips at us,
    Saying all we were despoiled by this one girl."

Like a spark that kindles the dry grass, their kindling anger spread,
and they rushed against Atalanta, seized the trophy she had been
given, and smote her as though she were but a shameless wanton and not
the noble daughter of a king.

And because the heart of Meleager was given very wholly to the fair
huntress, and because those whom he deemed his friends had not only
dishonoured her, but had done him a very grievous wrong, a great rage
seized him. Right and left he smote, and they who had been most bitter
in their jealousy of Atalanta, the two brothers of his own mother,
were laid low in death.

Tidings of the slaying of the boar had been brought to Alth√¶a by swift
messengers, and she was on her way to the temples bearing gifts to the
gods for the victory of her son, when she beheld the slow-footed
procession of those who bore the bodies of the dead. And when she saw
the still faces of her two dear brothers, quickly was her joy turned
into mourning. Terrible was her grief and anger when she learned by
whose hand they were slain, and her mother's love and pride dried up
in her heart like the clear water of a fountain before the scorching
of a devouring fire. No sacrifices to the gods would she offer, but
her dead brothers should have the greatest sacrifice that mother could
make to atone for the guilt of her son. Back to the palace she went,
and from its safe hiding-place drew out the brand that she had rescued
from the flames when Meleager the hero was but a babe that made his
mother's heart sing for joy. She commanded a fire to be prepared, and
four times, as its flames blazed aloft, she tried to lay the brand
upon the pile. Yet four times she drew back, and then at last she
threw into the reddest of the ashes the charred brand that for a
little she held so close to her breast that it seemed as though she
fondled her child.

A wreath of leaves as sign of victory was being placed on Atalanta's
beautiful head by the adoring hands of Meleager when his mother gave
him his doom. Through his body there rushed a pang of mortal agony.
His blood turned to fire, and the hand of Death that smote him was as
a hand of molten lead. In torture his gallant spirit passed away,
uncomplaining, loving through his pain the maid for whose dear sake he
had brought woe upon himself. As the last white ashes in the fire
crumbled and fell away into nothingness, the soul of Meleager
departed. Swiftly through the dark valley his mother's shade followed
him, for she fell upon a sword and so perished. And Diana, looking
down on the grief-stricken sisters of Meleager and on the bitter
sorrow of his father, had compassion on them and turned them into
birds.

So ended the Calydonian Hunt, and Atalanta returned to Arcadia, heavy
at heart for the evil she had wrought unwittingly. And still the Three
Fates span on, and the winds caught up the cold wood ashes and blew
them across the ravaged land that Meleager had saved and that quickly
grew fertile again.




ATALANTA


Atalanta, daughter of the king of Arcadia, returned sad at heart to
her own land. Only as comrades, as those against whose skill in the
chase she was wont to pit her own skill, had she looked upon men. But
Meleager, the hero who loved her and her fair honour more than life
itself, and whose love had made him haste in all his gallant strength
and youthful beauty to the land of the Shades, was one to touch her as
never before had she been touched. Her father, proud of her triumph in
Calydon, again besought her to marry one of her many noble suitors.

"If indeed they love me as thou sayest," said Atalanta to her father,
"then must they be ready to face for my sake even the loss of dear
life itself. I shall be the prize of him who outruns me in a
foot-race. But he who tries and fails, must pay to Death his penalty."

Thereafter, for many days, a strange sight was to be seen in Arcadia.
For one after another the suitors came to race with the maiden whose
face had bewitched them, though truly the race was no more fair to him
who ran than would be a race with Death. No mortal man was as fleet as
Atalanta, who had first raced with the wild things of the mountains
and the forests, and who had dared at last to race with the winds and
leave even them behind. To her it was all a glorious game. Her
conquest was always sure, and if the youths who entered in the contest
cared to risk their lives, why should they blame her? So each day they
started, throbbing hope and fierce determination to win her in the
heart of him who ran--fading hope and despairing anger as he saw her
skimming ahead of him like a gay-hued butterfly that a tired child
pursues in vain. And each day, as the race ended, another man paid the
price of his defeat.

Daily, amongst those who looked on, stood her cousin Milanion. He
would fain have hated Atalanta for her ruthlessness and her joyousness
as he saw his friends die for her sake, yet daily her beauty, her
purity, and her gallant unconsciousness took a firmer hold upon his
heart. To himself he vowed that he would win Atalanta, but not without
help from the gods was this possible. Therefore he sought Aphrodite
herself and asked her aid.

Milanion was a beautiful youth, and to Aphrodite, who loved beauty, he
pled his cause as he told her how Atalanta had become to him more than
life, so that he had ceased to pity the youths, his friends, who had
died for love of her. The goddess smiled upon him with gentle
sympathy.

In the garden of her temple grew a tree with branches and twigs of
gold, and leaves as yellow as the little leaves of the silver birch
when the autumn sun kisses them as it sets. On this tree grew golden
apples, and Aphrodite plucked three of them and gave them to the youth
who had not feared to ask her to aid him to win the maid he loved.
How he was to use the apples she then told him, and, well content,
Milanion returned home.

Next day he spoke to Atalanta.

"So far has victory been thine, Fairest on earth," he said, "but so
far have thy little winged white feet had only the heavy-footed
laggards to outrun. Wilt have me run a race with thee? for assuredly I
shall win thee for my own."

And Milanion looked into the eyes of Atalanta with a smile as gay and
fearless as that with which a hero is wont to look in the eyes of his
fellow.

Look for look did the virgin huntress give him.

Then her cheeks grew red, as though the rosy-fingered dawn had touched
them, and the dawning of love came into her heart.

Even Meleager was not quite so goodly a youth as this. Not even
Meleager had been so wholly fearless.

"Thou art tempted by the deathless gods," she said, but her long
lashes drooped on her cheek as she spoke. "I pity you, Milanion, for
when thou dost race with me, the goal is assuredly the meadows of
asphodel near where sit Pluto and Persephone on their gloomy thrones."

But Milanion said, "I am ready, Atalanta. Wilt race with me now?" And
steadily he looked in her eyes until again they fell as though at last
they had found a conqueror.

Like two swallows that skim across a sunny sea, filled with the
joyousness of the coming of spring, Atalanta and Milanion started.
Scarcely did their feet seem to touch the solid earth, and all
those who stood by vowed that now, at length, was a race indeed, a
race worthy for the gods to behold.

[Illustration: SHE STOPPED, AND PICKED UP THE TREASURE]

But as they ran, almost abreast, so that none could tell which was the
gainer, Milanion obeyed the bidding of Aphrodite and let fall one of
the golden apples. Never before had Atalanta dreamed of such a
thing--an apple of glistening gold! She stopped, poised on one foot as
a flying bird poises for a moment on the wing, and picked up the
treasure. But Milanion had sped several paces ahead ere she was again
abreast of him, and even as she gained on him, he dropped the second
apple. Again Atalanta was tempted. Again she stopped, and again
Milanion shot ahead of her. Her breath came short and fast, as once
more she gained the ground that she had lost. But, yet a third time,
Milanion threw in her way one of the golden illusions of the gods.
And, yet again, Atalanta stooped to pick up the apple of gold.

Then a mighty shout from those who watched rent the air, and Atalanta,
half fearful, half ashamed, yet wholly happy, found herself running,
vanquished, into the arms of him who was indeed her conqueror. For not
only had Milanion won the race, but he had won the heart of the virgin
huntress, a heart once as cold and remote as the winter snow on the
peak of Mount Olympus.




ARACHNE


The hay that so short a time ago was long, lush grass, with fragrant
meadow-sweet and gold-eyed marguerites growing amongst it in the green
meadow-land by the river, is now dry hay--fragrant still, though dead,
and hidden from the sun's warm rays underneath the dark wooden rafters
of the barn. Occasionally a cat on a hunting foray comes into the barn
to look for mice, or to nestle cosily down into purring slumber. Now
and then a hen comes furtively tip-toeing through the open door and
makes for itself a secret nest in which to lay the eggs which it
subsequently heralds with such loud clucks of proud rejoicing as to
completely undo all its previous precautions. Sometimes children come
in, pursuing cat or hen, or merely to tumble each other over amongst
the soft hay which they leave in chaotic confusion, and when they have
gone away, a little more of the sky can be seen through the little
window in the roof, and through the wooden bars of the window lower
down. Yet, whatever other living creatures may come or go, by those
windows of the barn, and high up on its dark rafters, there is always
a living creature working, ceaselessly working. When, through the
skylight, the sun-god drives a golden sunbeam, and a long shaft of
dancing dust-atoms passes from the window to what was once a part of
the early summer's glory, the work of the unresting toiler is also to
be seen, for the window is hung with shimmering grey tapestries made
by Arachne, the spider, and from rafter to rafter her threads are
suspended with inimitable skill.

She was a nymph once, they say--the daughter of Idmon the dyer, of
Colophon, a city of Lydia. In all Lydia there was none who could weave
as wove the beautiful Arachne. To watch her card the wool of the
white-fleeced sheep until in her fingers it grew like the soft clouds
that hang round the hill tops, was pleasure enough to draw nymphs from
the golden river Pactolus and from the vineyards of Tymolus. And when
she drove her swift shuttle hither and thither, still it was joy to
watch her wondrous skill. Magical was the growth of the web, fine of
woof, that her darting fingers span, and yet more magical the
exquisite devices that she then wrought upon it. For birds and flowers
and butterflies and pictures of all the beautiful things on earth were
limned by Arachne, and old tales grew alive again under her creative
needle.

To Pallas Athen√©, goddess of craftsmen, came tidings that at Colophon
in Lydia lived a nymph whose skill rivalled that of the goddess
herself, and she, ever jealous for her own honour, took on herself the
form of a woman bent with age, and, leaning on her staff, joined the
little crowd that hung round Arachne as she plied her busy needle.
With white arms twined round each other the eager nymphs watched the
flowers spring up under her fingers, even as flowers spring from the
ground on the coming of Demeter, and Athen√© was fain to admire, while
she marvelled at the magic skill of the fair Arachne.

Gently she spoke to Arachne, and, with the persuasive words of a wise
old woman, warned her that she must not let her ambition soar too
high. Greater than all skilled craftswomen was the great goddess
Athen√©, and were Arachne, in impious vanity, to dream that one day she
might equal her, that were indeed a crime for any god to punish.

Glancing up for a moment from the picture whose perfect colours grew
fast under her slim fingers, Arachne fixed scornful eyes on the old
woman and gave a merry laugh.

"Didst say _equal_ Athen√©? old mother," she said. "In good sooth thy
dwelling must be with the goat-herds in the far-off hills and thou art
not a dweller in our city. Else hadst thou not spoken to Arachne of
_equalling_ the work of Athen√©; _excelling_ were the better word."

In anger Pallas Athen√© made answer.

"Impious one!" she said, "to those who would make themselves higher
than the gods must ever come woe unutterable. Take heed what thou
sayest, for punishment will assuredly be thine."

Laughing still, Arachne made reply:

"I fear not, Athen√©, nor does my heart shake at the gloomy warning of
a foolish old crone." And turning to the nymphs who, half afraid,
listened to her daring words, she said: "Fair nymphs who watch me day
by day, well do ye know that I make no idle boast. My skill is as
great as that of Athen√©, and greater still it shall be. Let Athen√© try
a contest with me if she dare! Well do I know who will be the victor."

Then Athen√© cast off her disguise, and before the frightened nymphs
and the bold Arachne stood the radiant goddess with eyes that blazed
with anger and insulted pride.

"Lo, Athen√© is come!" she said, and nymphs and women fell on their
knees before her, humbly adoring. Arachne alone was unabashed. Her
cheeks showed how fast her heart was beating. From rosy red to white
went the colour in them, yet, in firm, low voice she spoke.

"I have spoken truth," she said. "Not woman, nor goddess, can do work
such as mine. Ready am I to abide by what I have said, and if I did
boast, by my boast I stand. If thou wilt deign, great goddess, to try
thy skill against the skill of the dyer's daughter and dost prove the
victor, behold me gladly willing to pay the penalty."

The eyes of Athen√©, the grey-eyed goddess, grew dark as the sea when a
thunder-cloud hangs over it and a mighty storm is coming. Not for one
moment did she delay, but took her place by the side of Arachne. On
the loom they stretched out two webs with a fine warp, and made them
fast on the beam.

    "The sley separates the warp, the woof is inserted in
    the middle with sharp shuttles, which the fingers hurry
    along, and, being drawn within the warp, the teeth
    notched in the moving sley strike it. Both hasten on,
    and girding up their garments to their breasts, they
    move their skilful arms, their eagerness beguiling their
    fatigue. There both the purple is being woven, which is
    subjected to the Tyrian brazen vessel, and fine shades
    of minute difference; just as the rainbow, with its
    mighty arch, is wont to tint a long tract of sky by
    means of the rays reflected by the shower; in which,
    though a thousand different colours are shining, yet the
    very transition eludes the eyes that look upon it....
    There, too, the pliant gold is mixed with the threads."

        Ovid.

Their canvases wrought, then did Athen√© and Arachne hasten to cover
them with pictures such as no skilled worker of tapestry has ever
since dreamed of accomplishing. Under the fingers of Athen√© grew up
pictures so real and so perfect that the watchers knew not whether the
goddess was indeed creating life. And each picture was one that told
of the omnipotence of the gods and of the doom that came upon those
mortals who had dared in their blasphemous presumption to struggle as
equals with the immortal dwellers in Olympus. Arachne glanced up from
her web and looked with eyes that glowed with the love of beautiful
things at the creations of Athen√©. Yet, undaunted, her fingers still
sped on, and the goddess saw, with brow that grew yet more clouded,
how the daughter of Idmon the dyer had chosen for subjects the tales
that showed the weaknesses of the gods. One after another the living
pictures grew beneath her hand, and the nymphs held their breath in
mingled fear and ecstasy at Arachne's godlike skill and most arrogant
daring. Between goddess and mortal none could have chosen, for the
colour and form and exquisite fancy of the pictures of the daughter of
Zeus were equalled, though not excelled, by those of the daughter of
the dyer of Colophon.

Darker and yet more dark grew the eyes of Athen√© as they looked on
the magical beauty of the pictures, each one of which was an insult to
the gods. What picture had skilful hand ever drawn to compare with
that of Europa who,

    "riding on the back of the divine bull, with one hand
    clasped the beast's great horn, and with the other
    caught up her garment's purple fold, lest it might trail
    and be drenched in the hoar sea's infinite spray. And
    her deep robe was blown out in the wind, like the sail
    of a ship, and lightly ever it wafted the maiden
    onward."

        Moschus.

Then at last did the storm break, and with her shuttle the enraged
goddess smote the web of Arachne, and the fair pictures were rent into
motley rags and ribbons. Furiously, too, with her shuttle of boxwood
she smote Arachne. Before her rage, the nymphs fled back to their
golden river and to the vineyards of Tymolus, and the women of
Colophon in blind terror rushed away. And Arachne, shamed to the dust,
knew that life for her was no longer worth possessing. She had
aspired, in the pride of her splendid genius, to a contest with a god,
and knew now that such a contest must ever be vain. A cord hung from
the weaver's beam, and swiftly she seized it, knotted it round her
white neck, and would have hanged herself. But ere the life had passed
out of her, Athen√© grasped the cord, loosened it, and spoke Arachne's
doom:

"Live!" she said, "O guilty and shameless one! For evermore shalt thou
live and hang as now, thou and thy descendants, that men may never
forget the punishment of the blasphemous one who dared to rival a
god."

Even as she spoke, Arachne's fair form dried up and withered. Her
straight limbs grew grey and crooked and wiry, and her white arms were
no more. And from the beam where the beautiful weaver of Lydia had
been suspended, there hung from a fine grey thread the creature from
which, to this day, there are but few who do not turn with loathing.
Yet still Arachne spins, and still is without a compeer.

    "Not anie damzell, which her vaunteth most
    In skilfull knitting of soft silken twyne,
    Nor anie weaver, which his worke doth boast
    In dieper, in damaske, or in lyne,
    Nor anie skil'd in workmanship embost,
    Nor anie skil'd in loupes of fingring fine,
    Might in their divers cunning ever dare
    With this so curious networke to compare."

        Spenser.

Thus, perhaps, does Arachne have her compensations, and in days that
followed long after the twilight of the gods, did she not gain eternal
honour in the heart of every Scot by the tale of how she saved a
national hero? Kindly, too, are her labours for men as she slays their
mortal enemies, the household flies, and when the peasant--practical,
if not favoured by √Üsculapius and Hygeia--runs to raid the loom of
Arachne in order to staunch the quick-flowing blood from the cut hand
of her little child, much more dear to her heart is Arachne the spider
than the unknown Athen√©.

    "Also in spinners be tokens of divination, and of
    knowing what weather shall fall--for oft by weathers
    that shall fall, some spin or weave higher or lower.
    Also multitude of spinners is token of much
    rain."

        Bartholomew.

The sun has not long enough shown his face to dry up the dew in the
garden, and behold on the little clipped tree of boxwood, a great
marvel! For in and out, and all over its twigs and leaves, Arachne has
woven her web, and on the web the dew has dropped a million diamond
drops. And, suddenly, all the colours in the sky are mirrored
dazzlingly on the grey tapestry of her making. Arachne has come to her
own again.




IDAS AND MARPESSA


By day, while the sun-god drove his chariot in the high heavens and
turned the blue-green √Ügean Sea into the semblance of a blazing shield
of brass, Idas and Marpessa sat together in the trees' soft shades, or
walked in shadowy valleys where violets and wild parsley grew, and
where Apollo rarely deigned to come. At eventide, when, in royal
splendour of purple and crimson and gold, Apollo sought his rest in
the western sky, Idas and Marpessa wandered by the seashore watching
the little wavelets softly kissing the pebbles on the beach, or
climbed to the mountain side from whence they could see the first
glimpse of Diana's silver crescent and the twinkling lights of the
Pleiades breaking through the blue canopy of the sky. While Apollo
sought in heaven and on earth the best means to gratify his imperial
whims, Idas, for whom all joys had come to mean but one, sought ever
to be by the side of Marpessa. Shadowy valley, murmuring sea, lonely
mountain side, or garden where grew the purple amaranth and where
roses of pink and amber-yellow and deepest crimson dropped their
radiant petals on the snowy marble paths, all were the same to
Idas--Paradise for him, were Marpessa by his side; without her, dreary
desert.

More beautiful than any flower that grew in the garden was Marpessa.
No music that Apollo's lute could make was as sweet in the ears of
Idas as her dear voice. Its music was ever new to him--a melody to
make his heart more quickly throb. New, too, ever was her beauty. For
him it was always the first time that they met, always the same fresh
ravishment to look in her eyes. And when to Idas came the knowledge
that Marpessa gave him love for love, he had indeed won happiness so
great as to draw upon him the envy of the gods.

"The course of true love never did run smooth," and, like many and
many another father since his day, Evenos, the father of Marpessa, was
bitterly opposed to a match where the bridegroom was rich only in
youth, in health, and in love. His beautiful daughter naturally seemed
to him worthy of something much more high. Thus it was an unhappy day
for Marpessa when, as she sat alone by the fountain which dripped
slowly down on the marble basin, and dreamed of her lover, Idas,
Apollo himself, led by caprice, noiselessly walked through the rose
bushes, whose warm petals dropped at his feet as he passed, and beheld
a maiden more fair than the fairest flower that grew. The hum of bees,
the drip, drip of the fountain, these lulled her mind and heart and
soothed her day-dreams, and Marpessa's red lips, curved like the bow
of Eros, smiled as she thought of Idas, the man she loved. Silently
Apollo watched her. This queen of all the roses was not fit to be the
bride of mortal man--Marpessa must be his.

To Evenos Apollo quickly imparted his desire. He was not used to
having his imperial wishes denied, nor was Evenos anxious to do so.
Here, indeed, was a match for his daughter. No insignificant mortal,
but the radiant sun-god himself! And to Marpessa he told what Apollo
wished, and Marpessa shyly looked at her reflection in the pool of the
fountain, and wondered if she were indeed beautiful enough to win the
love of a god.

"Am I in truth so wondrous fair?" she asked her father.

"Fair enough to mate with Apollo himself!" proudly answered Evenos.

And joyously Marpessa replied, "Ah, then am I happy indeed! I would be
beautiful for my Idas' sake!"

An angry man was her father. There was to be no more pleasant dallying
with Idas in the shadowy wood or by the seashore. In the rose garden
Apollo took his place and charmed Marpessa's ears with his music,
while her eyes could not but be charmed by his beauty. The god had no
doubts or fears. Only a little time he would give her, for a very
little only would he wait, and then undoubtedly this mortal maiden
would be his, her heart conquered as assuredly as the rays from his
chariot conquered the roses, whose warm crimson petals they strewed at
his feet. Yet as Marpessa looked and listened, her thoughts were often
far away and always her heart was with Idas. When Apollo played most
exquisitely to her it seemed that he put her love for Idas into music.
When he spoke to her of his love she thought, "Thus, and thus did Idas
speak," and a sudden memory of the human lad's halting words brought
to her heart a little gush of tenderness, and made her eyes sparkle
so that Apollo gladly thought, "Soon she will be mine."

[Illustration: MARPESSA SAT ALONE BY THE FOUNTAIN]

And all this while Idas schemed and plotted and planned a way in which
he could save his dear one from her obdurate father, and from the
passion of a god. He went to Neptune, told his tale, and begged him to
lend him a winged chariot in which he could fly away with Marpessa.
Neptune good-naturedly consented, and when Idas flew up from the
seashore one day, like a great bird that the tempests have blown
inland, Marpessa joyously sprang up beside her lover, and swiftly they
took flight for a land where in peace they might live and love
together. No sooner did Evenos realise that his daughter was gone,
than, in furious anger against her and her lover, he gave chase. One
has watched a hawk in pursuit of a pigeon or a bird of the moors and
seen it, a little dark speck at first, gradually growing larger and
more large until at length it dominated and conquered its prey,
swooping down from above, like an arrow from a bow, to bring with it
sudden death.

So at first it seemed that Evenos must conquer Idas and Marpessa in
the winged chariot of Neptune's lending. But onwards Idas drove the
chariot, ever faster and faster, until before the eyes of Marpessa the
trees of the forest grew into blurs of blue and brown, and the streams
and rivers as they flew past them were streaks of silver. Not until he
had reached the river Lycormas did the angry father own that his
pursuit had been in vain. Over the swift-flowing stream flew the
chariot driven by Idas, but Evenos knew that his horses, flecked with
white foam, pumping each breath from hearts that were strained to
breaking-point, no longer could go on with the chase. The passage of
that deep stream would destroy them. The fierce water would sweep the
wearied beasts down in its impelling current, and he with them. A
shamed man would he be forever. Not for a moment did he hesitate, but
drew his sharp sword from his belt and plunged it into the breast of
one steed and then of the other who had been so willing and who yet
had failed him in the end. And then, as they, still in their traces,
neighed shrilly aloud, and then fell over and died where they lay,
Evenos, with a great cry, leaped into the river. Over his head closed
the eddies of the peat-brown water. Once only did he throw up his arms
to ask the gods for mercy; then did his body drift down with the
stream, and his soul hastened downwards to the Shades. And from that
day the river Lycormas no more was known by that name, but was called
the river _Evenos_ forever.

Onwards, triumphantly, drove Idas, but soon he knew that a greater
than Evenos had entered in the chase, and that the jealous sun-god's
chariot was in pursuit of the winged car of Neptune. Quickly it gained
on him--soon it would have swept down on him--a hawk indeed, this
time, striking surely its helpless prey--but even as Apollo saw the
white face of Marpessa and knew that he was the victor, a mighty
thunderbolt that made the mountains shake, and rolled its echoes
through the lonely fastnesses of a thousand hills, was sent to earth
by Jupiter. While the echoes still re-echoed, there came from Olympus
the voice of Zeus himself.

"_Let her decide!_" he said.

Apollo, like a white flame blown backward by the wind, withheld his
hands that would have seized from Idas the woman who was his heart's
desire.

And then he spoke, and while his burning gaze was fixed upon her, and
his face, in beautiful fury, was more perfect than any exquisite
picture of her dreams, his voice was as the voice of the sea as it
calls to the shore in the moonlit hours, as the bird that sings in the
darkness of a tropic night to its longing mate.

"Marpessa!" he cried, "Marpessa! wilt thou not come to me? No woe nor
trouble, never any pain can touch me. Yet woe indeed was mine when
first I saw thy fairest face. For even now dost thou hasten to sorrow,
to darkness, to the dark-shadowed tomb. Thou art but mortal! thy
beauty is short-lived. Thy love for mortal man shall quickly fade and
die. Come to me, Marpessa, and my kisses on your lips shall make thee
immortal! Together we shall bring the sunbeams to a cold, dark land!
Together shall we coax the spring flowers from the still, dead earth!
Together we shall bring to men the golden harvest, and deck the trees
of autumn in our liveries of red and gold. I love thee, Marpessa--not
as mere mortal loves do I love thee. Come to me, Marpessa--my Love--my
Desire!"

When his voice was silent, it seemed as if the very earth itself with
all its thousand echoes still breathed his words: "Marpessa--my
Love--my Desire."

Abashed before the god's entreaties stood Idas. And the heart of
Marpessa was torn as she heard the burning words of the beautiful
Apollo still ringing through her head, and saw her mortal lover,
silent, white-lipped, gazing first at the god and then into her own
pale face. At length he spoke:

    "After such argument what can I plead?
    Or what pale promise make? Yet since it is
    In woman to pity rather than to aspire,
    A little I will speak. I love thee then
    Not only for thy body packed with sweet
    Of all this world, that cup of brimming June,
    That jar of violet wine set in the air,
    That palest rose sweet in the night of life;
    Nor for that stirring bosom all besieged
    By drowsing lovers, or thy perilous hair;
    Nor for that face that might indeed provoke
    Invasion of old cities; no, nor all
    Thy freshness stealing on me like strange sleep.
    Nor for this only do I love thee, but
    Because Infinity upon thee broods;
    And thou art full of whispers and of shadows.
    Thou meanest what the sea has striven to say
    So long, and yearned up the cliffs to tell;
    Thou art what all the winds have uttered not,
    What the still night suggesteth to the heart.
    Thy voice is like to music heard ere birth,
    Some spirit lute touched on a spirit sea;
    Thy face remembered is from other worlds,
    It has been died for, though I know not when,
    It has been sung of, though I know not where.
    It has the strangeness of the luring West,
    And of sad sea-horizons; beside thee
    I am aware of other times and lands,
    Of birth far-back, of lives in many stars.
    O beauty lone and like a candle clear
    In this dark country of the world! Thou art
    My woe, my early light, my music dying."

        Stephen Phillips.

Then Idas, in the humility that comes from perfect love, drooped low
his head, and was silent. In silence for a minute stood the three--a
god, a man, and a woman. And from on high the watching stars looked
down and marvelled, and Diana stayed for a moment the course of her
silver car to watch, as she thought, the triumph of her own invincible
brother.

From man to god passed the eyes of Marpessa, and back from god to man.
And the stars forgot to twinkle, and Diana's silver-maned horses pawed
the blue floor of the sky, impatient at the firm hand of the mistress
on the reins that checked their eager course.

Marpessa spoke at last, in low words that seemed to come "remembered
from other worlds."

For all the joys he offered her she thanked Apollo. What grander fate
for mortal woman than to rule the sunbeams--to bring bliss to the
earth and to the sons of men? What more could mortal woman crave than
the gift of immortality shared with one whose power ruled the vast
universe, and who still had stooped to lay the red roses of his
passionate love at her little, human feet? And yet--and yet--in that
sorrow-free existence that he promised, might there not still be
something awanting to one who had once known tears?

    "Yet I, being human, human sorrow miss."

Then were he indeed to give her the gift of immortal life, what value
were life to one whose beauty had withered as the leaves in autumn,
whose heart was tired and dead? What uglier fate than this, to endure
an endless existence in which no life was, yoked to one whose youth
was immortal, whose beauty was everlasting?

Then did she turn to Idas, who stood as one who awaits the judgment of
the judge in whose hands lies the power of meting out life or death.
Thus she spoke:

    "But if I live with Idas, then we two
    On the low earth shall prosper hand in hand
    In odours of the open field, and live
    In peaceful noises of the farm, and watch
    The pastoral fields burned by the setting sun.
    And he shall give me passionate children, not
    Some radiant god that will despise me quite,
    But clambering limbs and little hearts that err.
    ... So shall we live,
    And though the first sweet sting of love be past,
    The sweet that almost venom is; though youth,
    With tender and extravagant delight,
    The first and secret kiss by twilight hedge,
    The insane farewell repeated o'er and o'er,
    Pass off; there shall succeed a faithful peace;
    Beautiful friendship tried by sun and wind,
    Durable from the daily dust of life."

The sun-god frowned as her words fell from her lips. Even now, as she
looked at him, he held out his arms. Surely she only played with this
poor mortal youth. To him she must come, this rose who could own no
lesser god than the sun-god himself.

But Marpessa spoke on:

    "And thou beautiful god, in that far time,
    When in thy setting sweet thou gazest down
    On his grey head, wilt thou remember then
    That once I pleased thee, that I once was young?"

So did her voice cease, and on the earth fell sudden darkness. For to
Apollo had come the shame of love rejected, and there were those who
said that to the earth that night there came no sunset, only the
sullen darkness that told of the flight of an angry god. Yet, later,
the silver moonbeams of Diana seemed to greet the dark earth with a
smile, and, in the winged car of Neptune, Idas and Marpessa sped on,
greater than the gods, in a perfect harmony of human love that feared
nor time, nor pain, nor Death himself.




ARETHUSA


"We have victualled and watered," wrote Nelson from Syracuse in 1798,
"and surely, watering at the fountain of Arethusa, we must have
victory. We shall sail with the first breeze; and be assured I will
return either crowned with laurel or covered with cypress." Three days
later, he won the Battle of the Nile, one of the greatest sea-fights
of history.

Here in our own land the tales of the Greek gods seem very remote.
Like the colours in an old, old portrait, the humanity of the stories
seems to have faded. But in Sicily they grow vivid at once. Almost, as
we stand above Syracuse, that long yellow town by the sea--a
blue-green sea, with deep purple shadows where the clouds above it
grow dark, and little white-sailed boats, like white butterflies, wing
their way across to the far horizon--can we

    "Have glimpse of Proteus rising from the sea,
    Or hear old Triton blow his wreath√®d horn."

Here, to this day, one of the myths most impossible of acceptance to
the scientific modern mind lives on, and Arethusa is not yet forgotten.
"In Ortygia," says Cicero, "is a fountain of sweet water, the name of
which is Arethusa, of incredible flow, very full of fish, which would
be entirely overwhelmed by the sea, were its waters not protected from
the waves by a rampart and a wall of stone." White marble walls have
taken the place of the protecting barrier, but the spring bubbles up to
this day, and Ortygia (Quail Island) is the name still given to that
part of Syracuse. Fluffy-headed, long, green stalks of papyrus grow in
the fountain, and red and golden fish dart through its clear water.
Beyond lie the low shores of Plemmgrium, the fens of Lysimeleia, the
hills above the Anapus, and above all towers Etna, in snowy and
magnificent serenity and indifference to the changes wrought by the
centuries to gods and to men. Yet here the present is completely
overshadowed by the past, and even the story of Arethusa knocks loudly
at the well-barricaded doors of twentieth-century incredulity.

The beautiful Arethusa was a nymph in Diana's train, and many a time
in the chase did she thread her way through the dim woodland, as a
stream flows down through the forest from the mountains to the sea.
But to her, at last, there came a day when she was no longer the
huntress but the hunted.

The flaming wheels of the chariot of Apollo had made the whole land
scintillate with heat, and the nymph sought the kind shelter of a wood
where she might bathe in the exquisite coolness of the river that
still was chilled by the snows of the mountain. On the branch of a
tree that bent over the stream she hung her garments, and joyously
stepped into the limpid water. A ray of the sun glanced through the
leaves above her and made the soft sand in the river's bed gleam like
gold and the beautiful limbs of the nymph seem as though carved from
pure white marble by the hand of Pygmalion himself. There was no sound
there but the gentle sound of the stream that murmured caressingly to
her as it slowly moved on through the solitude, and so gently it
flowed that almost it seemed to stand still, as though regretful to
leave for the unknown forest so beautiful a thing as Arethusa.

    "The Earth seemed to love her
    And Heaven smiled above her."

But suddenly the stillness of the stream was ruffled. Waves, like the
newly-born brothers of the billows of the sea, swept both down-stream
and up-stream upon her, and the river no longer murmured gently, but
spoke to her in a voice that thrilled with passionate longing.
Alpheus, god of the river, had beheld her, and, beholding her, had
loved her once and forever. An uncouth creature of the forest was he,
unversed in all the arts of love-making. So not as a supplicant did he
come to her, but as one who demanded fiercely love for love. Terror
came upon Arethusa as she listened, and hastily she sprang from the
water that had brought fear upon her, and hastened to find shelter in
the woodlands. Then the murmur, as of the murmur of a river before a
mighty flood comes to seize it and hold it for its own, took form in a
voice that pled with her, in tones that made her tremble as she heard.

"Hear me, Arethusa!" it said. "I am Alpheus, god of the river that now
thou hast made sacred. I am the god of the rushing streams--the god of
the thundering cataracts. Where the mountain streams crash over the
rocks and echo through the shadowy hollows of the hills, I hold my
kingship. Down from Etna I come, and the fire of Etna is in my veins.
I love thee! I love but thee, and thou shalt be mine, and I thine
forever."

Then Arethusa, in blind panic, fled before the god who loved her.
Through the shadowy forest she sped, while he swiftly gained upon her.
The asphodel bent under her flying feet, and the golden flowers of the
_Fiori Maggio_ were swept aside as she fled. Yet ever Alpheus gained
upon her, until at length she felt that the chase was ended, and cried
to Diana to save her. Then a cloud, grey and thick and blinding as the
mist that wraps the mountain tops, suddenly descended and enfolded
her, and Alpheus groped for her in vain.

"Arethusa!" she heard him cry, in a voice of piteous
longing--"Arethusa!--my belov√®d!"

Patiently he waited, with the love that makes uncouth things
beautiful, until at length a little breath from Zephyrus blew aside
the soft grey veil that hid his beloved from his sight, and he saw
that the nymph had been transformed into a fountain. Not for a moment
did Alpheus delay, but, turning himself into a torrent in flood, he
rushed on in pursuit of Arethusa. Then did Diana, to save her votary,
cleave a way for her through the dark earth even into the gloomy realm
of Pluto himself, and the nymph rushed onward, onward still, and then
upward, until at length she emerged again to the freedom of the blue
sky and green trees, and beheld the golden orange groves and the grey
olives, the burning red geranium flowers and the great snow-capped
mountain of Sicily.

But Alpheus had a love for her that cast out all fear. Through the
terrible blackness of the Cocytus valley he followed Arethusa, and
found a means of bursting through the encumbering earth and joining
her again. And in a spring that rises out of the sea near the shore he
was able at last to mingle his waters with those of the one for whom
he had lost his godship.

      "And now from their fountains
      In Enna's mountains,
    Down one vale where the morning basks,
      Like friends once parted
      Grown single-hearted,
    They ply their watery tasks,
      At sunrise they leap
      From their cradles steep
    In the cave of the shelving hill;
      At noontide they flow
      Through the woods below
    And the meadows of asphodel;
      And at night they sleep
      In the rocking deep
    Beneath the Ortygian shore;
      Like spirits that lie
      In the azure sky
    When they love but live no more."

        Shelley.




PERSEUS THE HERO

    "We call such a man a hero in English to this day, and
    call it a 'heroic' thing to suffer pain and grief, that
    we may do good to our fellow-men."

        Charles Kingsley.


In the pleasant land of Argos, now a place of unwholesome marshes,
once upon a time there reigned a king called Acrisius, the father of
one fair daughter. Dana√´ was her name, and she was very dear to the
king until a day when he longed to know what lay hid for him in the
lap of the gods, and consulted an oracle. With hanging head he
returned from the temple, for the oracle had told him that when his
daughter Dana√´ had borne a son, by the hand of that son death must
surely come upon him. And because the fear of death was in him more
strong than the love of his daughter, Acrisius resolved that by
sacrificing her he would baffle the gods and frustrate Death itself. A
great tower of brass was speedily built at his command, and in this
prison Dana√´ was placed, to drag out her weary days.

But who can escape the designs of the gods? From Olympus great Zeus
himself looked down and saw the air princess sighing away her youth.
And, full of pity and of love, he himself entered the brazen tower in
a golden shower, and Dana√´ became the bride of Zeus and happily passed
with him the time of her imprisonment.

To her at length was born a son, a beautiful and kingly child, and
great was the wrath of her father when he had tidings of the birth.
Did the gods in the high heavens laugh at him? The laugh should yet be
on his side. Down to the seashore he hurried Dana√´ and her newly-born
babe, the little Perseus, put them in a great chest, and set them
adrift to be a plaything for winds and waves and a prey for the cruel
and hungry sea.

    "When in the cunningly-wrought chest the raging blast
    and the stirred billow and terror fell upon her, with
    tearful cheeks she cast her arm around Perseus and
    spake, 'Alas, my child, what sorrow is mine! But thou
    slumberest, in baby-wise sleeping in this woeful ark;
    midst the darkness of the brazen rivet thou shinest and
    in the swart gloom sent forth; thou heedest not the deep
    foam of the passing wave above thy locks nor the voice
    of the blast as thou liest in thy purple covering, a
    sweet face. If terror had terrors for thee, and thou
    wert giving ear to my gentle words--I bid thee sleep, my
    babe, and may the sea sleep and our measureless woe; and
    may change of fortune come forth, Father Zeus, from
    thee. For that I make my prayer in boldness and beyond
    right, forgive me.'"

        Simonides of Keos.

For days and nights the mother and child were tossed on the billows,
but yet no harm came near them, and one morning the chest grounded on
the rocky beach of Seriphos, an island in the √Ügean Sea. Here a
fisherman came on this strange flotsam and jetsam of the waves and
took the mother and child to Polydectes, the king, and the years that
followed were peaceful years for Dana√´ and for Perseus. But as Perseus
grew up, growing each day more goodly to look upon, more fearless,
more ready to gaze with serene courage into the eyes of gods and of
men, an evil thing befell his mother. She was but a girl when he was
born, and as the years passed she grew ever more fair. And the crafty
eyes of old Polydectes, the king, ever watched her more eagerly,
always more hotly desired her for his wife. But Dana√´, the beloved of
Zeus himself, had no wish to wed the old king of the Cyclades, and
proudly she scorned his suit. Behind her, as she knew well, was the
stout arm of her son Perseus, and while Perseus was there, the king
could do her no harm. But Perseus, unwitting of the danger his mother
daily had to face, sailed the seas unfearingly, and felt that peace
and safety surrounded him on every side. At Samos one day, while his
ship was lading, Perseus lay down under the shade of a great tree, and
soon his eyelids grew heavy with sleep, and there came to him, like
butterflies that flit over the flowers in a sunlit garden, pleasant,
light-winged dreams. But yet another dream followed close on the merry
heels of those that went before. And before Perseus there stood one
whose grey eyes were as the fathomless sea on the dawn of a summer
day. Her long robes were blue as the hyacinths in spring, and the
spear that she held in her hand was of a polished brightness, as the
dart with which the gods smite the heart of a man, with joy
inexpressible, with sorrow that is scarcely to be borne. To Perseus
she spoke winged words.

"I am Pallas Athen√©," she said, "and to me the souls of men are known.
Those whose fat hearts are as those of the beasts that perish do I
know. They live at ease. No bitter sorrow is theirs, nor any fierce
joy that lifts their feet free from the cumbering clay. But dear to my
heart are the souls of those whose tears are tears of blood, whose joy
is as the joy of the Immortals. Pain is theirs, and sorrow.
Disappointment is theirs, and grief. Yet their love is as the love of
those who dwell on Olympus. Patient they are and long-suffering, and
ever they hope, ever do they trust. Ever they fight, fearless and
unashamed, and when the sum of their days on earth is accomplished,
wings, of whose existence they have never had knowledge, bear them
upwards, out of the mist and din and strife of life, to the life that
has no ending."

Then she laid her hand on the hand of Perseus. "Perseus," she said,
"art thou of those whose dull souls forever dwell in pleasant ease, or
wouldst thou be as one of the Immortals?"

And in his dream Perseus answered without hesitation:

"Rather let me die, a youth, living my life to the full, fighting
ever, suffering ever," he said, "than live at ease like a beast that
feeds on flowery pastures and knows no fiery gladness, no
heart-bleeding pain."

Then Pallas Athen√©, laughing for joy, because she loved so well a
hero's soul, showed him a picture that made even his brave heart sick
for dread, and told him a terrible story.

In the dim, cold, far west, she said, there lived three sisters. One
of them, Medusa, had been one of her priestesses, golden-haired and
most beautiful, but when Athen√© found that she was as wicked as she
was lovely, swiftly had she meted out a punishment. Every lock of her
golden hair had been changed into a venomous snake. Her eyes, that had
once been the cradles of love, were turned into love's stony tombs.
Her rosy cheeks were now of Death's own livid hue. Her smile, which
drew the hearts of lovers from their bosoms, had become a hideous
thing. A grinning mask looked on the world, and to the world her
gaping mouth and protruding tongue meant a horror before which the
world stood terrified, dumb. There are some sadnesses too terrible for
human hearts to bear, so it came to pass that in the dark cavern in
which she dwelt, and in the shadowy woods around it, all living things
that had met the awful gaze of her hopeless eyes were turned into
stone. Then Pallas Athen√© showed Perseus, mirrored in a brazen shield,
the face of one of the tragic things of the world. And as Perseus
looked, his soul grew chill within him. But when Athen√©, in low voice,
asked him:

"Perseus, wilt even end the sorrow of this piteous sinful one?" he
answered, "Even that will I do--the gods helping me."

And Pallas Athen√©, smiling again in glad content, left him to dream,
and Perseus awoke, in sudden fear, and found that in truth he had but
dreamed, yet held his dream as a holy thing in the secret
treasure-house of his heart.

Back to Seriphos he sailed, and found that his mother walked in fear
of Polydectes the king. She told her son--a strong man now, though
young in years--the story of his cruel persecution. Perseus saw red
blood, and gladly would he have driven his keen blade far home in the
heart of Polydectes. But his vengeance was to be a great vengeance,
and the vengeance was delayed.

The king gave a feast, and on that day every one in the land brought
offerings of their best and most costly to do him honour. Perseus
alone came empty-handed, and as he stood in the king's court as though
he were a beggar, the other youths mocked at him of whom they had ever
been jealous.

"Thou sayest that thy father is one of the gods!" they said. "Where is
thy godlike gift, O Perseus!"

And Polydectes, glad to humble the lad who was keeper of his mother's
honour, echoed their foolish taunt.

"Where is the gift of the gods that the noble son of the gods has
brought me?" he asked, and his fat cheeks and loose mouth quivered
with ugly merriment.

Then Perseus, his head thrown back, gazed in the bold eyes of
Polydectes.

Son of Zeus he was indeed, as he looked with royal scorn at those whom
he despised.

"A godlike gift thou shalt have, in truth, O king," he said, and his
voice rang out as a trumpet-call before the battle. "The gift of the
gods shall be thine. The gods helping me, thou shalt have the head of
Medusa."

A laugh, half-born, died in the throats of Polydectes and of those who
listened, and Perseus strode out of the palace, a glow in his heart,
for he knew that Pallas Athen√© had lit the fire that burned in him
now, and that though he should shed the last drop of his life's blood
to win what he sought, right would triumph, and wrong must be worsted.

Still quivering with anger, Perseus went down to the blue sea that
gently whispered its secrets to the shore on which he stood.

"If Pallas Athen√© would but come," he thought--"if only my dreams
might come true."

For, like many a boy before and since, Perseus had dreamed of gallant,
fearless deeds. Like many a boy before and since, he had been the hero
of a great adventure.

So he prayed, "Come to me! I pray you, Pallas Athen√©, come! and let me
dream true."

His prayer was answered.

Into the sky there came a little silver cloud that grew and grew, and
ever it grew nearer, and then, as in his dream, Pallas Athen√© came to
him and smiled on him as the sun smiles on the water in spring. Nor
was she alone. Beside her stood Hermes of the winged shoes, and
Perseus knelt before the two in worship. Then, very gently, Pallas
Athen√© gave him counsel, and more than counsel she gave.

In his hand she placed a polished shield, than which no mirror shone
more brightly.

"Do not look at Medusa herself; look only on her image here
reflected--then strike home hard and swiftly. And when her head is
severed, wrap it in the goatskin on which the shield hangs. So wilt
thou return in safety and in honour."

"But how, then, shall I cross the wet grey fields of this watery
way?" asked Perseus. "Would that I were a white-winged bird that skims
across the waves."

And, with the smile of a loving comrade, Hermes laid his hand on the
shoulder of Perseus.

"My winged shoes shall be thine," he said, "and the white-winged
sea-birds shalt thou leave far, far behind."

"Yet another gift is thine," said Athen√©. "Gird on, as gift from the
gods, this sword that is immortal."

For a moment Perseus lingered. "May I not bid farewell to my mother?"
he asked. "May I not offer burnt-offerings to thee and to Hermes, and
to my father Zeus himself?"

But Athen√© said Nay, at his mother's weeping his heart might relent,
and the offering that the Olympians desired was the head of Medusa.

Then, like a fearless young golden eagle, Perseus spread out his arms,
and the winged shoes carried him across the seas to the cold northern
lands whither Athen√© had directed him.

Each day his shoes took him a seven days' journey, and ever the air
through which he passed grew more chill, till at length he reached the
land of everlasting snow, where the black ice never knows the
conquering warmth of spring, and where the white surf of the moaning
waves freezes solid even as it touches the shore.

It was a dark grim place to which he came, and in a gloomy cavern by
the sea lived the Grae√¶, the three grey sisters that Athen√© had told
him he must seek. Old and grey and horrible they were, with but one
tooth amongst them, and but one eye. From hand to hand they passed
the eye, and muttered and shivered in the blackness and the cold.

[Illustration: THEY WHIMPERED AND BEGGED OF HIM]

Boldly Perseus spoke to them and asked them to guide him to the place
where Medusa and her sisters the Gorgons dwelt.

"No others know where they dwell," he said. "Tell me, I pray thee, the
way that I may find them."

But the Grey Women were kin to the Gorgons, and hated all the children
of men, and ugly was their evil mirth as they mocked at Perseus and
refused to tell him where Medusa might be found.

But Perseus grew wily in his desire not to fail, and as the eye passed
from one withered, clutching hand to another, he held out his own
strong young palm, and in her blindness one of the three placed the
eye within it.

Then the Grey Women gave a piteous cry, fierce and angry as the cry of
old grey wolves that have been robbed of their prey, and gnashed upon
him with their toothless jaws.

And Perseus said: "Wicked ye are and cruel at heart, and blind shall
ye remain forever unless ye tell me where I may find the Gorgons. But
tell me that, and I give back the eye."

Then they whimpered and begged of him, and when they found that all
their beseeching was in vain, at length they told him.

"Go south," they said, "so far south that at length thou comest to the
uttermost limits of the sea, to the place where the day and night
meet. There is the Garden of the Hesperides, and of them must thou
ask the way." And "Give us back our eye!" they wailed again most
piteously, and Perseus gave back the eye into a greedy trembling old
hand, and flew south like a swallow that is glad to leave the gloomy
frozen lands behind.

To the garden of the Hesperides he came at last, and amongst the
myrtles and roses and sunny fountains he came on the nymphs who there
guard the golden fruit, and begged them to tell him whither he must
wing his way in order to find the Gorgons. But the nymphs could not
tell.

"We must ask Atlas," they said, "the giant who sits high up on the
mountain and with his strong shoulders keeps the heavens and earth
apart."

And with the nymphs Perseus went up the mountain and asked the patient
giant to guide him to the place of his quest.

"Far away I can see them," said Atlas, "on an island in the great
ocean. But unless thou wert to wear the helmet of Pluto himself, thy
going must be in vain."

"What is this helmet?" asked Perseus, "and how can I gain it?"

"Didst thou wear the helmet of the ruler of Dark Places, thou wouldst
be as invisible as a shadow in the blackness of night," answered
Atlas; "but no mortal can obtain it, for only the Immortals can brave
the terrors of the Shadowy Land and yet return; yet if thou wilt
promise me one thing, the helmet shall be thine."

"What wouldst thou?" asked Perseus.

And Atlas said, "For many a long year have I borne this earth, and I
grow aweary of my burden. When thou hast slain Medusa, let me gaze
upon her face, that I may be turned into stone and suffer no more
forever."

And Perseus promised, and at the bidding of Atlas one of the nymphs
sped down to the land of the Shades, and for seven days Perseus and
her sisters awaited her return. Her face was as the face of a white
lily and her eyes were dark with sadness when she came, but with her
she bore the helmet of Pluto, and when she and her sisters had kissed
Perseus and bidden him a sorrowful farewell, he put on the helmet and
vanished away.

Soon the gentle light of day had gone, and he found himself in a place
where clammy fog blotted out all things, and where the sea was black
as the water of that stream that runs through the Cocytus valley. And
in that silent land where there is "neither night nor day, nor cloud
nor breeze nor storm," he found the cave of horrors in which the
Gorgons dwelt.

Two of them, like monstrous swine, lay asleep,

    "But a third woman paced about the hall,
    And ever turned her head from wall to wall,
    And moaned aloud and shrieked in her despair,
    Because the golden tresses of her hair
    Were moved by writhing snakes from side to side,
    That in their writhing oftentimes would glide
    On to her breast or shuddering shoulders white;
    Or, falling down, the hideous things would light
    Upon her feet, and, crawling thence, would twine
    Their slimy folds upon her ankles fine."

        William Morris.

In the shield of Pallas Athen√© the picture was mirrored, and as
Perseus gazed on it his soul grew heavy for the beauty and the horror
of Medusa. And "Oh that it had been her foul sisters that I must
slay!" he thought at first, but then--"To slay her will be kind
indeed," he said. "Her beauty has become corruption, and all the joy
of life for her has passed into the agony of remembrance, the torture
of unending remorse."

And when he saw her brazen claws that still were greedy and lustful to
strike and to slay, his face grew stern, and he paused no longer, but
with his sword he smote her neck with all his might and main. And to
the rocky floor the body of Medusa fell with brazen clang, but her
head he wrapped in the goatskin, while he turned his eyes away. Aloft
then he sprang, and flew swifter than an arrow from the bow of Diana.

With hideous outcry the two other Gorgons found the body of Medusa,
and, like foul vultures that hunt a little song-bird, they flew in
pursuit of Perseus. For many a league they kept up the chase, and
their howling was grim to hear. Across the seas they flew, and over
the yellow sand of the Libyan desert, and as Perseus flew before them,
some blood-drops fell from the severed head of Medusa, and from them
bred the vipers that are found in the desert to this day. But bravely
did the winged shoes of Hermes bear Perseus on, and by nightfall the
Gorgon sisters had passed from sight, and Perseus found himself once
more in the garden of the Hesperides. Ere he sought the nymphs, he
knelt by the sea to cleanse from his hands Medusa's blood, and still
does the seaweed that we find on sea-beaches after a storm bear the
crimson stains.

And when Perseus had received glad welcome from the fair dwellers in
the garden of the Hesperides, he sought Atlas, that to him he might
fulfil his promise; and eagerly Atlas beheld him, for he was aweary of
his long toil.

So Perseus uncovered the face of Medusa and held it up for the Titan
to gaze upon.

And when Atlas looked upon her whose beauty had once been pure and
living as that of a flower in spring, and saw only anguish and
cruelty, foul wickedness, and hideous despair, his heart grew like
stone within him. To stone, too, turned his great, patient face, and
into stone grew his vast limbs and strong, crouching back. So did
Atlas the Titan become Atlas the Mountain, and still his head,
white-crowned with snow, and his great shoulder far up in misty
clouds, would seem to hold apart the earth and the sky.

Then Perseus again took flight, and in his flight he passed over many
lands and suffered weariness and want, and sometimes felt his faith
growing low. Yet ever he sped on, hoping ever, enduring ever. In Egypt
he had rest and was fed and honoured by the people of the land, who
were fain to keep him to be one of their gods. And in a place called
Chemmis they built a statue of him when he had gone, and for many
hundreds of years it stood there. And the Egyptians said that ever and
again Perseus returned, and that when he came the Nile rose high and
the season was fruitful because he had blessed their land.

Far down below him as he flew one day he saw something white on a
purple rock in the sea. It seemed too large to be a snowy-plumaged
bird, and he darted swiftly downward that he might see more clearly.
The spray lashed against the steep rocks of the desolate island, and
showered itself upon a figure that at first he took to be a statue of
white marble. The figure was but that of a girl, slight and very
youthful, yet more fair even than any of the nymphs of the Hesperides.
Invisible in his Helmet of Darkness, Perseus drew near, and saw that
the fragile white figure was shaken by shivering sobs. The waves,
every few moments, lapped up on her little cold white feet, and he saw
that heavy chains held her imprisoned to that chilly rock in the sea.
A great anger stirred the heart of Perseus, and swiftly he took the
helmet from his head and stood beside her. The maid gave a cry of
terror, but there was no evil thing in the face of Perseus. Naught but
strength and kindness and purity shone out of his steady eyes.

Thus when, very gently, he asked her what was the meaning of her cruel
imprisonment, she told him the piteous story, as a little child tells
the story of its grief to the mother who comforts it. Her mother was
queen of Ethiopia, she said, and very, very beautiful. But when the
queen had boasted that no nymph who played amongst the snow-crested
billows of the sea was as fair as she, a terrible punishment was sent
to her. All along the coast of her father's kingdom a loathsome
sea-monster came to hold its sway, and hideous were its ravages. Men
and women, children and animals, all were equally desirable food for
its insatiate maw, and the whole land of Ethiopia lay in mourning
because of it. At last her father, the king, had consulted an oracle
that he might find help to rid the land of the monster. And the oracle
had told him that only when his fair daughter, Andromeda, had been
sacrificed to the creature that scourged the sea-coast would the
country go free. Thus had she been brought there by her parents that
one life might be given for many, and that her mother's broken heart
might expiate her sin of vanity. Even as Andromeda spoke, the sea was
broken by the track of a creature that cleft the water as does the
forerunning gale of a mighty storm. And Andromeda gave a piteous cry.

"Lo! he comes!" she cried. "Save me! ah, save me! I am so young to
die."

Then Perseus darted high above her and for an instant hung poised like
a hawk that is about to strike. Then, like the hawk that cannot miss
its prey, swiftly did he swoop down and smote with his sword the
devouring monster of the ocean. Not once, but again and again he
smote, until all the water round the rock was churned into slime and
blood-stained froth, and until his loathsome combatant floated on its
back, mere carrion for the scavengers of the sea.

Then Perseus hewed off the chains that held Andromeda, and in his arms
he held her tenderly as he flew with her to her father's land.

Who so grateful then as the king and queen of Ethiopia? and who so
happy as Andromeda? for Perseus, her deliverer, dearest and greatest
hero to her in all the world, not only had given her her freedom, but
had given her his heart.

Willingly and joyfully her father agreed to give her to Perseus for
his wife. No marriage feast so splendid had ever been held in Ethiopia
in the memory of man, but as it went on, an angry man with a band of
sullen-faced followers strode into the banqueting-hall. It was
Phineus, he who had been betrothed to Andromeda, yet who had not dared
to strike a blow for her rescue. Straight at Perseus they rushed, and
fierce was the fight that then began. But of a sudden, from the
goatskin where it lay hid, Perseus drew forth the head of Medusa, and
Phineus and his warriors were turned into stone.

For seven days the marriage feast lasted, but on the eighth night
Pallas Athen√© came to Perseus in a dream.

"Nobly and well hast thou played the hero, O son of Zeus!" she said;
"but now that thy toil is near an end and thy sorrows have ended in
joy, I come to claim the shoes of Hermes, the helmet of Pluto, the
sword, and the shield that is mine own. Yet the head of the Gorgon
must thou yet guard awhile, for I would have it laid in my temple at
Seriphos that I may wear it on my shield for evermore."

As she ceased to speak, Perseus awoke, and lo, the shield and helmet
and the sword and winged shoes were gone, so that he knew that his
dream was no false vision.

Then did Perseus and Andromeda, in a red-prowed galley made by cunning
craftsmen from Ph≈ìnicia, sail away westward, until at length they
came to the blue water of the √Ügean Sea, and saw rising out of the
waves before them the rocks of Seriphos. And when the rowers rested on
their long oars, and the red-prowed ship ground on the pebbles of the
beach, Perseus and his bride sought Dana√´, the fair mother of Perseus.

Black grew the brow of the son of Dana√´ when she told him what cruel
things she had suffered in his absence from the hands of Polydectes
the king. Straight to the palace Perseus strode, and there found the
king and his friends at their revels. For seven years had Perseus been
away, and now it was no longer a stripling who stood in the palace
hall, but a man in stature and bearing like one of the gods.
Polydectes alone knew him, and from his wine he looked up with mocking
gaze.

"So thou hast returned? oh nameless son of a deathless god," he said.
"Thou didst boast, but methinks thy boast was an empty one!"

But even as he spoke, the jeering smile froze on his face, and the
faces of those who sat with him stiffened in horror.

"O king," Perseus said, "I swore that, the gods helping me, thou
shouldst have the head of Medusa. The gods have helped me. Behold the
Gorgon's head."

Wild horror in their eyes, Polydectes and his friends gazed on the
unspeakable thing, and as they gazed they turned into stone--a ring of
grey stones that still sit on a hillside of Seriphos.

With his wife and his mother, Perseus then sailed away, for he had a
great longing to take Dana√´ back to the land of her birth and to see
if her father, Acrisius, still lived and might not now repent of his
cruelty to her and to his grandson. But there he found that the sins
of Acrisius had been punished and that he had been driven from his
throne and his own land by a usurper. Not for long did the sword of
Perseus dwell in its scabbard, and speedily was the usurper cast
forth, and all the men of Argos acclaimed Perseus as their glorious
king. But Perseus would not be their king.

"I go to seek Acrisius," he said. "My mother's father is your king."

Again his galley sailed away, and at last, up the long Eub≈ìan Sea
they came to the town of Larissa, where the old king now dwelt.

A feast and sports were going on when they got there, and beside the
king of the land sat Acrisius, an aged man, yet a kingly one indeed.

And Perseus thought, "If I, a stranger, take part in the sports and
carry away prizes from the men of Larissa, surely the heart of
Acrisius must soften towards me."

Thus did he take off his helmet and cuirass, and stood unclothed
beside the youths of Larissa, and so godlike was he that they all
said, amazed, "Surely this stranger comes from Olympus and is one of
the Immortals."

In his hand he took a discus, and full five fathoms beyond those of
the others he cast it, and a great shout arose from those who watched,
and Acrisius cried out as loudly as all the rest.

"Further still!" they cried. "Further still canst thou hurl! thou art
a hero indeed!"

And Perseus, putting forth all his strength, hurled once again, and
the discus flew from his hand like a bolt from the hand of Zeus. The
watchers held their breath and made ready for a shout of delight as
they saw it speed on, further than mortal man had ever hurled before.
But joy died in their hearts when a gust of wind caught the discus as
it sped and hurled it against Acrisius, the king. And with a sigh like
the sigh that passes through the leaves of a tree as the woodman fells
it and it crashes to the earth, so did Acrisius fall and lie prone. To
his side rushed Perseus, and lifted him tenderly in his arms. But the
spirit of Acrisius had fled. And with a great cry of sorrow Perseus
called to the people:

"Behold me! I am Perseus, grandson of the man I have slain! Who can
avoid the decree of the gods?"

For many a year thereafter Perseus reigned as king, and to him and to
his fair wife were born four sons and three daughters. Wisely and well
he reigned, and when, at a good old age, Death took him and the wife
of his heart, the gods, who had always held him dear, took him up
among the stars to live for ever and ever. And there still, on clear
and starry nights, we may see him holding the Gorgon's head. Near him
are the father and mother of Andromeda--Cepheus and Cassiopeia, and
close beside him stands Andromeda with her white arms spread out
across the blue sky as in the days when she stood chained to the rock.
And those who sail the watery ways look up for guidance to one whose
voyaging is done and whose warfare is accomplished, and take their
bearings from the constellation of Cassiopeia.




NIOBE

    "... Like Niobe, all tears."

        Shakespeare.


The quotation is an overworked quotation, like many another of those
from _Hamlet_; yet, have half of those whose lips utter it more than
the vaguest acquaintance with the story of Niobe and the cause of her
tears? The noble group--attributed to Praxiteles--of Niobe and her
last remaining child, in the Uffizi Palace at Florence, has been so
often reproduced that it also has helped to make the anguished figure
of the Theban queen a familiar one in pictorial tragedy, so that as
long as the works of those Titans of art, Shakespeare and Praxiteles,
endure, no other monument is wanted for the memory of Niobe.

Like many of the tales of mythology, her tragedy is a story of
vengeance wreaked upon a mortal by an angry god. She was the daughter
of Tantalus, and her husband was Amphion, King of Thebes, himself a
son of Zeus. To her were born seven fair daughters and seven beautiful
and gallant sons, and it was not because of her own beauty, nor her
husband's fame, nor their proud descent and the greatness of their
kingdom, that the Queen of Thebes was arrogant in her pride. Very sure
she was that no woman had ever borne children like her own children,
whose peers were not to be found on earth nor in heaven. Even in our
own day there are mortal mothers who feel as Niobe felt.

But amongst the Immortals there was also a mother with children whom
she counted as peerless. Latona, mother of Apollo and Diana, was
magnificently certain that in all time, nor in eternity to come, could
there be a son and daughter so perfect in beauty, in wisdom, and in
power as the two that were her own. Loudly did she proclaim her proud
belief, and when Niobe heard it she laughed in scorn.

"The goddess has a son and a daughter," she said. "Beautiful and wise
and powerful they may be, but I have borne seven daughters and seven
sons, and each son is more than the peer of Apollo, each daughter more
than the equal of Diana, the moon-goddess!"

And to her boastful words Latona gave ear, and anger began to grow in
her heart.

Each year the people of Thebes were wont to hold a great festival in
honour of Latona and her son and daughter, and it was an evil day for
Niobe when she came upon the adoring crowd that, laurel-crowned, bore
frankincense to lay before the altars of the gods whose glories they
had assembled together to celebrate.

"Oh foolish ones!" she said, and her voice was full of scorn, "am I
not greater than Latona? I am the daughter of a goddess, my husband,
the king, the son of a god. Am I not fair? am I not queenly as Latona
herself? And, of a surety, I am richer by far than the goddess who has
but one daughter and one son. Look on my seven noble sons! behold the
beauty of my seven daughters, and see if they in beauty and all else
do not equal the dwellers in Olympus!"

And when the people looked, and shouted aloud, for in truth Niobe and
her children were like unto gods, their queen said, "Do not waste thy
worship, my people. Rather make the prayers to thy king and to me and
to my children who buttress us round and make our strength so great,
that fearlessly we can despise the gods."

In her home on the Cynthian mountain top, Latona heard the arrogant
words of the queen of Thebes, and even as a gust of wind blows
smouldering ashes into a consuming fire, her growing anger flamed into
rage. She called Apollo and Diana to her, and commanded them to avenge
the blasphemous insult which had been given to them and to their
mother. And the twin gods listened with burning hearts.

"Truly shalt thou be avenged!" cried Apollo. "The shameless one shall
learn that not unscathed goes she who profanes the honour of the
mother of the deathless gods!"

And with their silver bows in their hands, Apollo, the smiter from
afar, and Diana, the virgin huntress, hasted to Thebes. There they
found all the noble youths of the kingdom pursuing their sports. Some
rode, some were having chariot-races, and excelling in all things were
the seven sons of Niobe.

Apollo lost no time. A shaft from his quiver flew, as flies a bolt
from the hand of Zeus, and the first-born of Niobe fell, like a young
pine broken by the wind, on the floor of his winning chariot. His
brother, who followed him, went on the heels of his comrade swiftly
down to the Shades. Two of the other sons of Niobe were wrestling
together, their great muscles moving under the skin of white satin
that covered their perfect bodies, and as they gripped each other, yet
another shaft was driven from the bow of Apollo, and both lads fell,
joined by one arrow, on the earth, and there breathed their lives
away.

Their elder brother ran to their aid, and to him, too, came death,
swift and sure. The two youngest, even as they cried for mercy to an
unknown god, were hurried after them by the unerring arrows of Apollo.
The cries of those who watched this terrible slaying were not long in
bringing Niobe to the place where her sons lay dead. Yet, even then,
her pride was unconquered, and she defied the gods, and Latona, to
whose jealousy she ascribed the fate of her "seven spears."

"Not yet hast thou conquered, Latona!" she cried. "My seven sons lie
dead, yet to me still remain the seven perfect lovelinesses that I
have borne. Try to match them, if thou canst, with the beauty of thy
two! Still am I richer than thou, O cruel and envious mother of one
daughter and one son!"

But even as she spoke, Diana had drawn her bow, and as the scythe of a
mower quickly cuts down, one after the other, the tall white blossoms
in the meadow, so did her arrows slay the daughters of Niobe. When one
only remained, the pride of Niobe was broken. With her arms round the
little slender frame of her golden-haired youngest born, she looked up
to heaven, and cried upon all the gods for mercy.

"She is so little!" she wailed. "So young--so dear! Ah, spare me
_one_," she said, "only one out of so many!"

But the gods laughed. Like a harsh note of music sounded the twang of
Diana's bow. Pierced by a silver arrow, the little girl lay dead. The
dignity of Latona was avenged.

Overwhelmed by despair, King Amphion killed himself, and Niobe was
left alone to gaze on the ruin around her. For nine days she sat, a
Greek Rachel, weeping for her children and refusing to be comforted,
because they were not. On the tenth day, the sight was too much even
for the superhuman hearts of the gods to endure. They turned the
bodies into stone and themselves buried them. And when they looked on
the face of Niobe and saw on it a bleeding anguish that no human hand
could stay nor the word of any god comfort, the gods were merciful.
Her grief was immortalised, for Niobe, at their will, became a stone,
and was carried by a wailing tempest to the summit of Mount Sipylus,
in Lydia, where a spring of Argos bore her name. Yet although a rock
was Niobe, from her blind eyes of stone the tears still flowed, a
clear stream of running water, symbol of a mother's anguish and
never-ending grief.




HYACINTHUS

                ... "The sad death
    Of Hyacinthus, when the cruel breath
    Of Zephyr slew him--Zephyr penitent
    Who now, ere Ph≈ìbus mounts the firmament,
    Fondles the flower amid the sobbing rain."

        Keats.


"Whom the gods love die young"--truly it would seem so, as we read the
old tales of men and of women beloved of the gods. To those men who
were deemed worthy of being companions of the gods, seemingly no good
fortune came. Yet, after all, if even in a brief span of life they had
tasted god-given happiness, was their fate one to be pitied? Rather
let us keep our tears for those who, in a colourless grey world, have
seen the dull days go past laden with trifling duties, unnecessary
cares and ever-narrowing ideals, and have reached old age and the
grave--no narrower than their lives--without ever having known a
fulness of happiness, such as the Olympians knew, or ever having dared
to reach upwards and to hold fellowship with the Immortals.

Hyacinthus was a Spartan youth, son of Clio, one of the Muses, and of
the mortal with whom she had mated, and from mother, or father, or
from the gods themselves, he had received the gift of beauty. It
chanced one day that as Apollo drove his chariot on its
all-conquering round, he saw the boy. Hyacinthus was as fair to look
upon as the fairest of women, yet he was not only full of grace, but
was muscular, and strong as a straight young pine on Mount Olympus
that fears not the blind rage of the North Wind nor the angry tempests
of the South.

When Apollo had spoken with him he found that the face of Hyacinthus
did not belie the heart within him, and gladly the god felt that at
last he had found the perfect companion, the ever courageous and
joyous young mate, whose mood was always ready to meet his own. Did
Apollo desire to hunt, with merry shout Hyacinthus called the hounds.
Did the great god deign to fish, Hyacinthus was ready to fetch the
nets and to throw himself, whole-souled, into the great affair of
chasing and of landing the silvery fishes. When Apollo wished to climb
the mountains, to heights so lonely that not even the moving of an
eagle's wing broke the everlasting stillness, Hyacinthus--his strong
limbs too perfect for the chisel of any sculptor worthily to
reproduce--was ready and eager for the climb. And when, on the
mountain top, Apollo gazed in silence over illimitable space, and
watched the silver car of his sister Diana rising slowly into the deep
blue of the sky, silvering land and water as she passed, it was never
Hyacinthus who was the first to speak--with words to break the spell
of Nature's perfect beauty, shared in perfect companionship. There
were times, too, when Apollo would play his lyre, and when naught but
the music of his own making could fulfil his longing. And when those
times came, Hyacinthus would lie at the feet of his friend--of the
friend who was a god--and would listen, with eyes of rapturous joy, to
the music that his master made. A very perfect friend was this friend
of the sun-god.

Nor was it Apollo alone who desired the friendship of Hyacinthus.
Zephyrus, god of the South Wind, had known him before Apollo crossed
his path and had eagerly desired him for a friend. But who could stand
against Apollo? Sulkily Zephyrus marked their ever-ripening
friendship, and in his heart jealousy grew into hatred, and hatred
whispered to him of revenge. Hyacinthus excelled at all sports, and
when he played quoits it was sheer joy for Apollo, who loved all
things beautiful, to watch him as he stood to throw the disc, his taut
muscles making him look like Hermes, ready to spurn the cumbering
earth from off his feet. Further even than the god, his friend, could
Hyacinthus throw, and always his merry laugh when he succeeded made
the god feel that nor man nor god could ever grow old. And so there
came that day, fore-ordained by the Fates, when Apollo and Hyacinthus
played a match together. Hyacinthus made a valiant throw, and Apollo
took his place, and cast the discus high and far. Hyacinthus ran
forward eager to measure the distance, shouting with excitement over a
throw that had indeed been worthy of a god. Thus did Zephyrus gain his
opportunity. Swiftly through the tree-tops ran the murmuring South
Wind, and smote the discus of Apollo with a cruel hand. Against the
forehead of Hyacinthus it dashed, smiting the locks that lay upon it,
crashing through skin and flesh and bone, felling him to the earth.
Apollo ran towards him and raised him in his arms. But the head of
Hyacinthus fell over on the god's shoulder, like the head of a lily
whose stem is broken. The red blood gushed to the ground, an
unquenchable stream, and darkness fell on the eyes of Hyacinthus, and,
with the flow of his life's blood, his gallant young soul passed away.

"Would that I could die for thee, Hyacinthus!" cried the god, his
god's heart near breaking. "I have robbed thee of thy youth. Thine is
the suffering, mine the crime. I shall sing thee ever--oh perfect
friend! And evermore shalt thou live as a flower that will speak to
the hearts of men of spring, of everlasting youth--of life that lives
forever."

As he spoke, there sprang from the blood-drops at his feet a cluster
of flowers, blue as the sky in spring, yet hanging their heads as if
in sorrow.[4]

[Illustration: DARKNESS FELL ON THE EYES OF HYACINTHUS]

And still, when winter is ended, and the song of birds tell us of the
promise of spring, if we go to the woods, we find traces of the vow of
the sun-god. The trees are budding in buds of rosy hue, the willow
branches are decked with silvery catkins powdered with gold. The
larches, like slender dryads, wear a feathery garb of tender green,
and under the trees of the woods the primroses look up, like fallen
stars. Along the woodland path we go, treading on fragrant
pine-needles and on the beech leaves of last year that have not yet
lost their radiant amber. And, at a turn of the way, the sun-god
suddenly shines through the great dark branches of the giants of the
forest, and before us lies a patch of exquisite blue, as though a god
had robbed the sky and torn from it a precious fragment that seems
alive and moving, between the sun and the shadow.

And, as we look, the sun caresses it, and the South Wind gently moves
the little bell-shaped flowers of the wild hyacinth as it softly
sweeps across them. So does Hyacinthus live on; so do Apollo and
Zephyrus still love and mourn their friend.


FOOTNOTE:

[4] Legend says that on the petals of the hyacinth Apollo transcribed
the letters "A√¨,"--"Alas!"




KING MIDAS OF THE GOLDEN TOUCH


In the plays of Shakespeare we have three distinct divisions--three
separate volumes. One deals with Tragedy, another with Comedy, a third
with History; and a mistake made by the young in their aspect of life
is that they do the same thing, and keep tragedy and comedy severely
apart, relegating them to separate volumes that, so they think, have
nothing to do with each other. But those who have passed many
milestones on the road know that "_History_" is the only right label
for the Book of Life's many parts, and that the actors in the great
play are in truth tragic comedians.

This is the story of Midas, one of the chief tragic comedians of
mythology.

Once upon a time the kingdom of Phrygia lacked a king, and in much
perplexity, the people sought help from an oracle. The answer was very
definite:

"The first man who enters your city riding in a car shall be your
king."

That day there came slowly jogging into the city in their heavy,
wooden-wheeled wain, the peasant Gordias and his wife and son, whose
destination was the marketplace, and whose business was to sell the
produce of their little farm and vineyard--fowls, a goat or two, and
a couple of skinsful of strong, purple-red wine. An eager crowd
awaited their entry, and a loud shout of welcome greeted them. And
their eyes grew round and their mouths fell open in amaze when they
were hailed as King and Queen and Prince of Phrygia.

The gods had indeed bestowed upon Gordias, the low-born peasant, a
surprising gift, but he showed his gratitude by dedicating his wagon
to the deity of the oracle and tying it up in its place with the
wiliest knot that his simple wisdom knew, pulled as tight as his
brawny arms and strong rough hands could pull. Nor could anyone untie
the famous Gordian knot, and therefore become, as the oracle promised,
lord of all Asia, until centuries had passed, and Alexander the Great
came to Phrygia and sliced through the knot with his all-conquering
sword.

In time Midas, the son of Gordias, came to inherit the throne and
crown of Phrygia. Like many another not born and bred to the purple,
his honours sat heavily upon him. From the day that his father's wain
had entered the city amidst the acclamations of the people, he had
learned the value of power, and therefore, from his boyhood onward,
power, always more power, was what he coveted. Also his peasant father
had taught him that gold could buy power, and so Midas ever longed for
more gold, that could buy him a place in the world that no descendant
of a long race of kings should be able to contest. And from Olympus
the gods looked down and smiled, and vowed that Midas should have the
chance of realising his heart's desire.

Therefore one day when he and his court were sitting in the solemn
state that Midas required, there rode into their midst, tipsily
swaying on the back of a gentle full-fed old grey ass, ivy-crowned,
jovial and foolish, the satyr Silenus, guardian of the young god
Bacchus.

With all the deference due to the friend of a god Midas treated this
disreputable old pedagogue, and for ten days and nights on end he
feasted him royally. On the eleventh day Bacchus came in search of his
preceptor, and in deep gratitude bade Midas demand of him what he
would, because he had done Silenus honour when to dishonour him lay in
his power.

Not even for a moment did Midas ponder.

"I would have gold," he said hastily--"much gold. I would have that
touch by which all common and valueless things become golden
treasures."

And Bacchus, knowing that here spoke the son of peasants who many
times had gone empty to bed after a day of toilful striving on the
rocky uplands of Phrygia, looked a little sadly in the eager face of
Midas, and answered: "Be it as thou wilt. Thine shall be the golden
touch."

Then Bacchus and Silenus went away, a rout of singing revellers at
their heels, and Midas quickly put to proof the words of Bacchus.

An olive tree grew near where he stood, and from it he picked a little
twig decked with leaves of softest grey, and lo, it grew heavy as he
held it, and glittered like a piece of his crown. He stooped to touch
the green turf on which some fragrant violets grew, and turf grew into
cloth of gold, and violets lost their fragrance and became hard,
solid, golden things. He touched an apple whose cheek grew rosy in the
sun, and at once it became like the golden fruit in the Garden of the
Hesperides. The stone pillars of his palace as he brushed past them on
entering, blazed like a sunset sky. The gods had not deceived him.
Midas had the Golden Touch. Joyously he strode into the palace and
commanded a feast to be prepared--a feast worthy of an occasion so
magnificent.

But when Midas, with the healthy appetite of the peasant-born, would
have eaten largely of the savoury food that his cooks prepared, he
found that his teeth only touched roast kid to turn it into a slab of
gold, that garlic lost its flavour and became gritty as he chewed,
that rice turned into golden grains, and curdled milk became a dower
fit for a princess, entirely unnegotiable for the digestion of man.
Baffled and miserable, Midas seized his cup of wine, but the red wine
had become one with the golden vessel that held it; nor could he
quench his thirst, for even the limpid water from the fountain was
melted gold when it touched his dry lips. Only for a very few days was
Midas able to bear the affliction of his wealth. There was nothing now
for him to live for. He could buy the whole earth if he pleased, but
even children shrank in terror from his touch, and hungry and thirsty
and sick at heart he wearily dragged along his weighty robes of gold.
Gold was power, he knew well, yet of what worth was gold while he
starved? Gold could not buy him life and health and happiness.

In despair, at length he cried to the god who had given him the gift
that he hated.

"Save me, O Bacchus!" he said. "A witless one am I, and the folly of
my desire has been my undoing. Take away from me the accursed Golden
Touch, and faithfully and well shall I serve thee forever."

Then Bacchus, very pitiful for him, told Midas to go to Sardis, the
chief city of his worshippers, and to trace to its source the river
upon which it was built. And in that pool, when he found it, he was to
plunge his head, and so he would, for evermore, be freed from the
Golden Touch.

It was a long journey that Midas then took, and a weary and a starving
man was he when at length he reached the spring where the river
Pactolus had its source. He crawled forward, and timidly plunged in
his head and shoulders. Almost he expected to feel the harsh grit of
golden water, but instead there was the joy he had known as a peasant
boy when he laved his face and drank at a cool spring when his day's
toil was ended. And when he raised his face from the pool, he knew
that his hateful power had passed from him, but under the water he saw
grains of gold glittering in the sand, and from that time forth the
river Pactolus was noted for its gold.

One lesson the peasant king had learnt by paying in suffering for a
mistake, but there was yet more suffering in store for the tragic
comedian.

He had now no wish for golden riches, nor even for power. He wished to
lead the simple life and to listen to the pipings of Pan along with
the goat-herds on the mountains or the wild creatures in the woods.
Thus it befell that he was present one day at a contest between Pan
and Apollo himself. It was a day of merry-making for nymphs and fauns
and dryads, and all those who lived in the lonely solitudes of Phrygia
came to listen to the music of the god who ruled them. For as Pan sat
in the shade of a forest one night and piped on his reeds until the
very shadows danced, and the water of the stream by which he sat leapt
high over the mossy stones it passed, and laughed aloud in its glee,
the god had so gloried in his own power that he cried:

"Who speaks of Apollo and his lyre? Some of the gods may be well
pleased with his music, and mayhap a bloodless man or two. But my
music strikes to the heart of the earth itself. It stirs with rapture
the very sap of the trees, and awakes to life and joy the innermost
soul of all things mortal."

Apollo heard his boast, and heard it angrily.

"Oh, thou whose soul is the soul of the untilled ground!" he said,
"wouldst thou place thy music, that is like the wind in the reeds,
beside my music, which is as the music of the spheres?"

And Pan, splashing with his goat's feet amongst the water-lilies of
the stream on the bank of which he sat, laughed loudly and cried:

"Yea, would I, Apollo! Willingly would I play thee a match--thou on
thy golden lyre--I on my reeds from the river."

Thus did it come to pass that Apollo and Pan matched against each
other their music, and King Midas was one of the judges.

First of all Pan took his fragile reeds, and as he played, the leaves
on the trees shivered, and the sleeping lilies raised their heads, and
the birds ceased their song to listen and then flew straight to their
mates. And all the beauty of the world grew more beautiful, and all
its terror grew yet more grim, and still Pan piped on, and laughed to
see the nymphs and the fauns first dance in joyousness and then
tremble in fear, and the buds to blossom, and the stags to bellow in
their lordship of the hills. When he ceased, it was as though a
tensely-drawn string had broken, and all the earth lay breathless and
mute. And Pan turned proudly to the golden-haired god who had listened
as he had spoken through the hearts of reeds to the hearts of men.

"Canst, then, make music like unto my music, Apollo?" he said.

Then Apollo, his purple robes barely hiding the perfection of his
limbs, a wreath of laurel crowning his yellow curls, looked down at
Pan from his godlike height and smiled in silence. For a moment his
hand silently played over the golden strings of his lyre, and then his
finger-tips gently touched them. And every creature there who had a
soul, felt that that soul had wings, and the wings sped them straight
to Olympus. Far away from all earth-bound creatures they flew, and
dwelt in magnificent serenity amongst the Immortals. No longer was
there strife, or any dispeace. No more was there fierce warring
between the actual and the unknown. The green fields and thick woods
had faded into nothingness, and their creatures, and the fair nymphs
and dryads, and the wild fauns and centaurs longed and fought no more,
and man had ceased to desire the impossible. Throbbing nature and
passionately desiring life faded into dust before the melody that
Apollo called forth, and when his strings had ceased to quiver and
only the faintly remembered echo of his music remained, it was as
though the earth had passed away and all things had become new.

For the space of many seconds all was silence.

Then, in low voice, Apollo asked:

"Ye who listen--who is the victor?"

And earth and sea and sky, and all the creatures of earth and sky, and
of the deep, replied as one:

"The victory is thine, Divine Apollo."

Yet was there one dissentient voice.

Midas, sorely puzzled, utterly un-understanding, was relieved when the
music of Apollo ceased. "If only Pan would play again," he murmured to
himself. "I wish to live, and Pan's music gives me life. I love the
woolly vine-buds and the fragrant pine-leaves, and the scent of the
violets in the spring. The smell of the fresh-ploughed earth is dear
to me, the breath of the kine that have grazed in the meadows of wild
parsley and of asphodel. I want to drink red wine and to eat and love
and fight and work and be joyous and sad, fierce and strong, and very
weary, and to sleep the dead sleep of men who live only as weak
mortals do."

Therefore he raised his voice, and called very loud: "Pan's music is
sweeter and truer and greater than the music of Apollo. Pan is the
victor, and I, King Midas, give him the victor's crown!"

With scorn ineffable the sun-god turned upon Midas, his peasant's face
transfigured by his proud decision. For a little he gazed at him in
silence, and his look might have turned a sunbeam to an icicle.

Then he spoke:

"The ears of an ass have heard my music," he said. "Henceforth shall
Midas have ass's ears."

And when Midas, in terror, clapped his hands to his crisp black hair,
he found growing far beyond it, the long, pointed ears of an ass.
Perhaps what hurt him most, as he fled away, was the shout of
merriment that came from Pan. And fauns and nymphs and satyrs echoed
that shout most joyously.

Willingly would he have hidden in the woods, but there he found no
hiding-place. The trees and shrubs and flowering things seemed to
shake in cruel mockery. Back to his court he went and sent for the
court hairdresser, that he might bribe him to devise a covering for
these long, peaked, hairy symbols of his folly. Gladly the hairdresser
accepted many and many oboli, many and many golden gifts, and all
Phrygia wondered, while it copied, the strange headdress of the king.

But although much gold had bought his silence, the court barber was
unquiet of heart. All day and all through the night he was tormented
by his weighty secret. And then, at length, silence was to him a
torture too great to be borne; he sought a lonely place, there dug a
deep hole, and, kneeling by it, softly whispered to the damp earth:
"King Midas has ass's ears."

Greatly relieved, he hastened home, and was well content until, on the
spot where his secret lay buried, rushes grew up. And when the winds
blew through them, the rushes whispered for all those who passed by to
hear: "King Midas has ass's ears! King Midas has ass's ears!" Those
who listen very carefully to what the green rushes in marshy places
whisper as the wind passes through them, may hear the same thing to
this day. And those who hear the whisper of the rushes may, perhaps,
give a pitying thought to Midas--the tragic comedian of mythology.




CEYX AND HALCYONE

    "St. Martin's summer, halcyon days."

        _King Henry VI_, i. 2, 131.


"Halcyon days"--how often is the expression made use of, how seldom do
its users realise from whence they have borrowed it.

"These were halcyon days," says the old man, and his memory wanders
back to a time when for him

      "All the world is young, lad,
    And all the trees are green;
    And every goose a swan, lad,
    And every lass a queen."

Yet the story of Halcyone is one best to be understood by the
heavy-hearted woman who wanders along the bleak sea-beach and strains
her weary eyes for the brown sail of the fishing-boat that will never
more return.

Over the kingdom of Thessaly, in the days of long ago, there reigned a
king whose name was Ceyx, son of Hesperus, the Day Star, and almost as
radiant in grace and beauty as was his father. His wife was the fair
Halcyone, daughter of √Üolus, ruler of the winds, and most perfectly
did this king and queen love one another. Their happiness was unmarred
until there came a day when Ceyx had to mourn for the loss of a
brother. Following close on the heels of this disaster came direful
prodigies which led Ceyx to fear that in some way he must have
incurred the hostility of the gods. To him there was no way in which
to discover wherein lay his fault, and to make atonement for it, but
by going to consult the oracle of Apollo at Claros, in Ionia. When he
told Halcyone what he must do, she knew well that she must not try to
turn him from his solemn purpose, yet there hung over her heart a
black shadow of fear and of evil foreboding that no loving words of
assurance could drive away. Most piteously she begged him to take her
with him, but the king knew too well the dangers of the treacherous
√Ügean Sea to risk on it the life of the woman that he loved so well.

"I promise," he said, "by the rays of my Father the Day Star, that if
fate permits I will return before the moon shall have twice rounded
her orb."

Down by the shore the sailors of King Ceyx awaited his coming, and
when with passionately tender love he and Halcyone had taken farewell
of each other, the rowers sat down on the benches and dipped their
long oars into the water.

With rhythmic swing they drove the great ship over the grey sea, while
Ceyx stood on deck and gazed back at his wife until his eyes could no
longer distinguish her from the rocks on the shore, nor could she any
longer see the white sails of the ship as it crested the restless
waves. Heavier still was her heart when she turned away from the
shore, and yet more heavy it grew as the day wore on and dark night
descended. For the air was full of the clamorous wailings of the
fierce winds whose joy it is to lash the waves into rage and to strew
with dead men and broken timber the angry, surf-beaten shore.

"My King," she sighed to herself. "My King! my Own!" And through the
weary hours she prayed to the gods to bring him safely back to her,
and many times she offered fragrant incense to Juno, protectress of
women, that she might have pity on a woman whose husband and true
lover was out in the storm, a plaything for ruthless winds and waves.

A helpless plaything was the king of Thessaly. Long ere the dim
evening light had made of the shore of his own land a faint, grey
line, the white-maned horses of Poseidon, king of the seas, began to
rear their heads, and as night fell, a black curtain, blotting out
every landmark, and all home-like things, the East Wind rushed across
the √Ügean Sea, smiting the sea-horses into madness, seizing the sails
with cruel grasp and casting them in tatters before it, snapping the
mast as though it were but a dry reed by the river. Before so mighty a
tempest no oars could be of any avail, and for a little time only the
winds and waves gambolled like a half-sated wolf-pack over their
helpless prey. With hungry roar the great weight of black water stove
in the deck and swept the sailors out of the ship to choke them in its
icy depths; and ever it would lift the wounded thing high up on its
foaming white crests, as though to toss it to the dark sky, and ever
again would suck it down into the blackness, while the shrieking winds
drove it onward with howling taunts and mocking laughter. While life
stayed in him, Ceyx thought only of Halcyone. He had no fear, only
the fear of the grief his death must bring to her who loved him as he
loved her, his peerless queen, his Halcyone. His prayers to the gods
were prayers for her. For himself he asked one thing only--that the
waves might bear his body to her sight, so that her gentle hands might
lay him in his tomb. With shout of triumph that they had slain a king,
winds and waves seized him even as he prayed, and the Day Star that
was hidden behind the black pall of the sky knew that his son, a brave
king and a faithful lover, had gone down to the Shades.

When Dawn, the rosy-fingered, had come to Thessaly, Halcyone,
white-faced and tired-eyed, anxiously watched the sea, that still was
tossing in half-savage mood. Eagerly she gazed at the place where last
the white sail had been seen. Was it not possible that Ceyx, having
weathered the gale, might for the present have foregone his voyage to
Ionia, and was returning to her to bring peace to her heart? But the
sea-beach was strewn with wrack and the winds still blew bits of
tattered surf along the shore, and for her there was only the heavy
labour of waiting, of waiting and of watching for the ship that never
came. The incense from her altars blew out, in heavy sweetness, to
meet the bitter-sweet tang of the seaweed that was carried in by the
tide, for Halcyone prayed on, fearful, yet hoping that her prayers
might still keep safe her man--her king--her lover. She busied herself
in laying out the garments he would wear on his return, and in
choosing the clothes in which she might be fairest in his eyes. This
robe, as blue as the sky in spring--silver-bordered, as the sea in
kind mood is bordered with a feathery silver fringe. She could recall
just how Ceyx looked when first he saw her wear it. She could hear his
very tones as he told her that of all queens she was the peeress, of
all women the most beautiful, of all wives the most dear. Almost she
forgot the horrors of the night, so certain did it seem that his dear
voice must soon again tell her the words that have been love's litany
since ever time began.

In the ears of Juno those petitions for him whose dead body was even
then being tossed hither and thither by the restless waves, his
murderers, came at last to be more than even she could bear. She gave
command to her handmaiden Iris to go to the palace of Somnus, god of
Sleep and brother of Death, and to bid him send to Halcyone a vision,
in the form of Ceyx, to tell her that all her weary waiting was in
vain.

In a valley among the black Cimmerian mountains the death-god Somnus
had his abode. In her rainbow-hued robes, Iris darted through the sky
at her mistress's bidding, tingeing, as she sped through them, the
clouds that she passed. It was a silent valley that she reached at
last. Here the sun never came, nor was there ever any sound to break
the silence. From the ground the noiseless grey clouds, whose work it
is to hide the sun and moon, rose softly and rolled away up to the
mountain tops and down to the lowest valleys, to work the will of the
gods. All around the cave lurked the long dark shadows that bring fear
to the heart of children, and that, at nightfall, hasten the steps of
the timid wayfarer. No noise was there, but from far down the valley
there came a murmur so faint and so infinitely soothing that it was
less a sound than of a lullaby remembered in dreams. For past the
valley of Sleep flow the waters of Lethe, the river of Forgetfulness.
Close up to the door of the cave where dwelt the twin brothers, Sleep
and Death, blood-red poppies grew, and at the door itself stood
shadowy forms, their fingers on their lips, enjoining silence on all
those who would enter in, amaranth-crowned, and softly waving sheaves
of poppies that bring dreams from which there is no awakening. There
was there no gate with hinges to creak or bars to clang, and into the
stilly darkness Iris walked unhindered. From outer cave to inner cave
she went, and each cave she left behind was less dark than the one
that she entered. In the innermost room of all, on an ebony couch
draped with sable curtains, the god of sleep lay drowsing. His
garments were black, strewn with golden stars. A wreath of half-opened
poppies crowned his sleepy head, and he leaned on the strong shoulder
of Morpheus, his favourite son. All round his bed hovered pleasant
dreams, gently stooping over him to whisper their messages, like a
field of wheat swayed by the breeze, or willows that bow their silver
heads and murmur to each other the secrets that no one ever knows.
Brushing the idle dreams aside, as a ray of sunshine brushes away the
grey wisps of mist that hang to the hillside, Iris walked up to the
couch where Somnus lay. The light from her rainbow-hued robe lit up
the darkness of the cave, yet Somnus lazily only half-opened his
eyes, moved his head so that it rested more easily, and in a sleepy
voice asked of her what might be her errand. "Somnus," she said,
"gentlest of gods, tranquilliser of minds and soother of careworn
hearts, Juno sends you her commands that you despatch a dream to
Halcyone in the city of Trachine, representing her lost husband and
all the events of the wreck."

Her message delivered, Iris hastened away, for it seemed to her that
already her eyelids grew heavy, and that there were creeping upon her
limbs, throwing silver dust in her eyes, lulling into peaceful slumber
her mind, those sprites born of the blood-red poppies that bring to
weary mortals rest and sweet forgetfulness.

Only rousing himself sufficiently to give his orders, Somnus entrusted
to Morpheus the task imposed upon him by Juno, and then, with a yawn,
turned over on his downy pillow, and gave himself up to exquisite
slumber.

When he had winged his way to Trachine, Morpheus took upon himself the
form of Ceyx and sought the room where Halcyone slept. She had watched
the far horizon many hours that day. For many an hour had she vainly
burned incense to the gods. Tired in heart and soul, in body and in
mind, she laid herself down on her couch at last, hoping for the gift
of sleep. Not long had she slept, in the dead-still sleep that
weariness and a stricken heart bring with them, when Morpheus came and
stood by her side. He was only a dream, yet his face was the face of
Ceyx. Not the radiant, beautiful son of the Day Star was the Ceyx who
stood by her now and gazed on her with piteous, pitying dead eyes.
His clothing dripped sea-water; in his hair was tangled the weed of
the sea, uprooted by the storm. Pale, pale was his face, and his white
hands gripped the stones and sand that had failed him in his dying
agony.

Halcyone whimpered in her sleep as she looked on him, and Morpheus
stooped over her and spoke the words that he had been told to say.

"I am thy husband, Ceyx, Halcyone. No more do prayers and the
blue-curling smoke of incense avail me. Dead am I, slain by the storm
and the waves. On my dead, white face the skies look down and the
restless sea tosses my chill body that still seeks thee, seeking a
haven in thy dear arms, seeking rest on thy warm, loving heart."

With a cry Halcyone started up, but Morpheus had fled, and there were
no wet footprints nor drops of sea-water on the floor, marking, as she
had hoped, the way that her lord had taken. Not again did Sleep visit
her that night.

A grey, cold morning dawned and found her on the seashore. As ever,
her eyes sought the far horizon, but no white sail, a messenger of
hope, was there to greet her. Yet surely she saw something--a black
speck, like a ship driven on by the long oars of mariners who knew
well the path to home through the watery ways. From far away in the
grey it hasted towards her, and then there came to Halcyone the
knowledge that no ship was this thing, but a lifeless body, swept
onwards by the hurrying waves. Nearer and nearer it came, until at
length she could recognise the form of this flotsam and jetsam of the
sea. With heart that broke as she uttered the words, she stretched
out her arms and cried aloud: "O Ceyx! my Beloved! is it thus that
thou returnest to me?"

To break the fierce assaults of sea and of storm there had been built
out from the shore a mole, and on to this barrier leapt the distraught
Halcyone. She ran along it, and when the dead, white body of the man
she loved was still out of reach, she prayed her last prayer--a
wordless prayer of anguish to the gods.

"Only let me get near him," she breathed. "Grant only that I nestle
close against his dear breast. Let me show him that, living or dead, I
am his, and he mine forever."

And to Halcyone a great miracle was then vouchsafed, for from out of
her snowy shoulders grew snow-white pinions, and with them she skimmed
over the waves until she reached the rigid body of Ceyx, drifting, a
helpless burden for the conquering waves, in with the swift-flowing
tide. As she flew, she uttered cries of love and of longing, but only
strange raucous cries came from the throat that had once only made
music. And when she reached the body of Ceyx and would fain have
kissed his marble lips, Halcyone found that no longer were her own
lips like the petals of a fair red rose warmed by the sun. For the
gods had heard her prayer, and her horny beak seemed to the watchers
on the shore to be fiercely tearing at the face of him who had been
king of Thessaly.

[Illustration: A GREY COLD MORNING FOUND HER ON THE SEASHORE]

Yet the gods were not merciless--or, perhaps, the love of Halcyone was
an all-conquering love. For as the soul of Halcyone had passed into
the body of a white-winged sea-bird, so also passed the soul of her
husband the king. And for evermore Halcyone and her mate, known as the
Halcyon birds, defied the storm and tempest, and proudly breasted,
side by side, the angriest waves of the raging seas.

To them, too, did the gods grant a boon: that, for seven days before
the shortest day of the year, and for seven days after it, there
should reign over the sea a great calm in which Halcyone, in her
floating nest, should hatch her young. And to those days of calm and
sunshine, the name of the Halcyon Days was given.

And still, as a storm approaches, the white-winged birds come flying
inland with shrill cries of warning to the mariners whose ships they
pass in their flight.

"Ceyx!" they cry. "Remember Ceyx!"

And hastily the fishermen fill their sails, and the smacks drive
homeward to the haven where the blue smoke curls upwards from the
chimneys of their homesteads, and where the red poppies are nodding
sleepily amongst the yellow corn.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Note._--The kingfisher is commonly known as the real
    "Halcyon" bird. Of it Socrates says: "The bird is not
    great, but it has received great honour from the gods
    because of its lovingness; for while it is making its
    nest, all the world has the happy days which it calls
    halcyonid√¶, excelling all others in their calmness."




ARIST√ÜUS THE BEE-KEEPER

    "... Every sound is sweet;
    Myriads of rivers hurrying thro' the lawn,
    The moan of doves in immemorial elms,
    And murmuring of innumerable bees."

        Tennyson.


In the fragrance of the blossom of the limes the bees are gleaning a
luscious harvest. Their busy humming sounds like the surf on a reef
heard from very far away, and would almost lull to sleep those who
lazily, drowsily spend the sunny summer afternoon in the shadow of the
trees. That line of bee-hives by the sweet-pea hedge shows where they
store their treasure that men may rob them of it, but out on the
uplands where the heather is purple, the wild bees hum in and out of
the honey-laden bells and carry home their spoils to their own free
fastnesses, from which none can drive them unless there comes a foray
against them from the brown men of the moors.

How many of us who watch their ardent labours know the story of
Arist√¶us--he who first brought the art of bee-keeping to perfection in
his own dear land of Greece, and whose followers are those men in
veils of blue and green, that motley throng who beat fire-irons and
create a hideous clamour in order that the queen bee and her excited
followers may be checked in their perilous voyagings and beguiled to
swarm in the sanctuary of a hive.

Arist√¶us was a shepherd, the son of Cyrene, a water nymph, and to him
there had come one day, as he listened to the wild bees humming
amongst the wild thyme, the great thought that he might conquer these
busy workers and make their toil his gain. He knew that hollow trees
or a hole in a rock were used as the storage houses of their treasure,
and so the wily shepherd lad provided for them the homes he knew that
they would covet, and near them placed all the food that they most
desired. Soon Arist√¶us became noted as a tamer of bees, and even in
Olympus they spoke of his honey as a thing that was food for the gods.
All might have gone well with Arist√¶us had there not come for him the
fateful day when he saw the beautiful Eurydice and to her lost his
heart. She fled before the fiery protestations of his love, and trod
upon the serpent whose bite brought her down to the Shades. The gods
were angry with Arist√¶us, and as punishment they slew his bees. His
hives stood empty and silent, and no more did "the murmuring of
innumerable bees" drowse the ears of the herds who watched their
flocks cropping the red clover and the asphodel of the meadows.

Underneath the swift-flowing water of a deep river, the nymph who was
the mother of Arist√¶us sat on her throne. Fishes darted round her
white feet, and beside her sat her attendants, spinning the fine
strong green cords that twine themselves round the throats of those
who perish when their arms can no longer fight against the force of
the rushing current. A nymph sang as she worked, an old, old song,
that told one of the old, old tales of man's weakness and the power of
the creatures of water, but above her song those who listened heard a
man's voice, calling loudly and pitifully.

The voice was that of Arist√¶us, calling aloud for his mother. Then his
mother gave command, and the waters of the river rolled asunder and
let Arist√¶us pass down far below to where the fountains of the great
rivers lie. A mighty roar of many waters dinned in his ears as the
rivers started on the race that was to bring them all at last to their
restless haven, the Ocean. To Cyrene he came at length, and to her
told his sorrowful tale:

"To men who live their little lives and work and die as I
myself--though son of a nymph and of a god--must do," he said, "I have
brought two great gifts, oh my mother. I have taught them that from
the grey olives they can reap a priceless harvest, and from me they
have learned that the little brown bees that hum in and out of the
flowers may be made slaves that bring to them the sweetest riches of
which Nature may be robbed."

"This do I already know, my son," said Cyrene, and smiled upon
Arist√¶us.

"Yet dost thou not know," said Arist√¶us, "the doom that has overtaken
my army of busy workers. No longer does there come from my city of
bees the boom of many wings and many busy little feet as they fly,
swift and strong, hither and thither, to bring back to the hives
their honeyed treasure. The comb is empty. The bees are all dead--or,
if not dead, they have forsaken me forever."

Then spoke Cyrene. "Hast heard, my son," she said, "of Proteus? It is
he who herds the flocks of the boundless sea. On days when the South
Wind and the North Wind wrestle together, and when the Wind from the
East smites the West Wind in shame before him, thou mayst see him
raise his snowy head and long white beard above the grey-green waves
of the sea, and lash the white-maned, unbridled, fierce sea-horses
into fury before him. Proteus only--none but Proteus--can tell thee by
what art thou canst win thy bees back once more."

Then Arist√¶us with eagerness questioned his mother how he might find
Proteus and gain from him the knowledge that he sought, and Cyrene
answered: "No matter how piteously thou dost entreat him, never, save
by force, wilt thou gain his secret from Proteus. Only if thou canst
chain him by guile as he sleeps and hold fast the chains, undaunted by
the shapes into which he has the power to change himself, wilt thou
win his knowledge from him."

Then Cyrene sprinkled her son with the nectar of the deathless gods,
and in his heart there was born a noble courage and through him a new
life seemed to run.

"Lead me now to Proteus, oh my mother!" he said, and Cyrene left her
throne and led him to the cave where Proteus, herdsman of the seas,
had his dwelling. Behind the seaweed-covered rocks Arist√¶us concealed
himself, while the nymph used the fleecy clouds for her covering. And
when Apollo drove his chariot across the high heavens at noon, and all
land and all sea were hot as molten gold, Proteus with his flocks
returned to the shade of his great cave by the sobbing sea, and on its
sandy floor he stretched himself, and soon lay, his limbs all lax and
restful, in the exquisite joy of a dreamless sleep. From behind the
rocks Arist√¶us watched him, and when, at length, he saw that Proteus
slept too soundly to wake gently he stepped forward, and on the
sleep-drowsed limbs of Proteus fixed the fetters that made him his
captive. Then, in joy and pride at having been the undoing of the
shepherd of the seas, Arist√¶us shouted aloud. And Proteus, awaking,
swiftly turned himself into a wild boar with white tusks that lusted
to thrust themselves into the thighs of Arist√¶us. But Arist√¶us,
unflinching, kept his firm hold of the chain. Next did he become a
tiger, tawny and velvet black, and fierce to devour. And still
Arist√¶us held the chain, and never let his eye fall before the glare
of the beast that sought to devour him. A scaly dragon came next,
breathing out flames, and yet Arist√¶us held him. Then came a lion, its
yellow pelt scented with the lust of killing, and while Arist√¶us yet
strove against him there came to terrify his listening ears the sound
of fire that lapped up and thirstily devoured all things that would
stand against it. And ere the crackle of the flames and their great
sigh of fierce desire had ceased, there came in his ears the sound of
many waters, the booming rush of an angry river in furious flood, the
irresistible command of the almighty waves of the sea. Yet still
Arist√¶us held the chains, and at last Proteus took his own shape
again, and with a sigh like the sigh of winds and waves on the
desolate places where ships become wrecks, and men perish and there is
never a human soul to save or to pity them, he spoke to Arist√¶us.

"Puny one!" he said, "and puny are thy wishes! Because thou didst by
thy foolish wooing send the beautiful Eurydice swiftly down to the
Shades and break the heart of Orpheus, whose music is the music of the
Immortals, the bees that thou hast treasured have left their hives
empty and silent. So little are the bees! so great, O Arist√¶us, the
bliss or woe of Orpheus and Eurydice! Yet, because by guile thou hast
won the power to gain from me the knowledge that thou dost seek,
hearken to me now, Arist√¶us! Four bulls must thou find--four cows of
equal beauty. Then must thou build in a leafy grove four altars, and
to Orpheus and Eurydice pay such funeral honours as may allay their
resentment. At the end of nine days, when thou hast fulfilled thy
pious task, return and see what the gods have sent thee."

"This will I do most faithfully, O Proteus," said Arist√¶us, and
gravely loosened the chains and returned to where his mother awaited
him, and thence travelled to his own sunny land of Greece.

Most faithfully, as he had said, did Arist√¶us perform his vow. And
when, on the ninth day, he returned to the grove of sacrifice, a sound
greeted him which made his heart stop and then go on beating and
throbbing as the heart of a man who has striven valiantly in a great
fight and to whom the battle is assured.

For, from the carcase of one of the animals offered for sacrifice, and
whose clean white bones now gleamed in the rays of the sun that forced
its way through the thick shade of the grove of grey olives, there
came the "murmuring of innumerable bees."

"Out of the eater came forth meat, out of the strong came forth
sweetness."

And Arist√¶us, a Samson of the old Greek days, rejoiced exceedingly,
knowing that his thoughtless sin was pardoned, and that for evermore
to him belonged the pride of giving to all men the power of taming
bees, the glory of mastering the little brown creatures that pillage
from the fragrant, bright-hued flowers their most precious treasure.




PROSERPINE

    "Sacred Goddess, Mother Earth,
    Thou from whose immortal bosom,
    Gods, and men, and beasts have birth,
    Leaf and blade, and bud and blossom,
    Breathe thine influence most divine
    On thine own child, Proserpine.

    If with mists of evening dew
    Thou dost nourish those young flowers
    Till they grow, in scent and hue,
    Fairest children of the hours,
    Breathe thine influence most divine
    On thine own child, Proserpine."

        Shelley.


The story of Persephone--of Proserpine--is a story of spring. When the
sun is warming the bare brown earth, and the pale primroses look up
through the snowy blackthorns at a kind, blue sky, almost can we hear
the soft wind murmur a name as it gently sways the daffodils and
breathes through the honey sweetness of the gold-powdered catkins on
the grey willows by the river--"Persephone! Persephone!"

Now once there was a time when there was no spring, neither summer nor
autumn, nor chilly winter with its black frosts and cruel gales and
brief, dark days. Always was there sunshine and warmth, ever were
there flowers and corn and fruit, and nowhere did the flowers grow
with more dazzling colours and more fragrant perfume than in the fair
garden of Sicily.

To Demeter, the Earth Mother, was born a daughter more fair than any
flower that grew, and ever more dear to her became her child, the
lovely Proserpine. By the blue sea, in the Sicilian meadows,
Proserpine and the fair nymphs who were her companions spent their
happy days. Too short were the days for all their joy, and Demeter
made the earth yet fairer than it was that she might bring more
gladness to her daughter Proserpine. Each day the blossoms that the
nymphs twined into garlands grew more perfect in form and in hue, but
from the anemones of royal purple and crimson, and the riotous red of
geraniums, Proserpine turned one morning with a cry of gladness, for
there stood before her beside a little stream, on one erect, slim
stem, a wonderful narcissus, with a hundred blossoms. Her eager hand
was stretched out to pluck it, when a sudden black cloud overshadowed
the land, and the nymphs, with shrieks of fear, fled swiftly away. And
as the cloud descended, there was heard a terrible sound, as of the
rushing of many waters or the roll of the heavy wheels of the chariot
of one who comes to slay. Then was the earth cleft open, and from it
there arose the four coal-black horses of Pluto, neighing aloud in
their eagerness, while the dark-browed god urged them on, standing
erect in his car of gold.

    "'The coal-black horses rise--they rise,
    O mother, mother!' low she cries--
    Persephone--Persephone!
    'O light, light, light!' she cries, 'farewell;
    The coal-black horses wait for me.
    O shade of shades, where I must dwell,
    Demeter, mother, far from thee!'"[5]

In cold, strong arms Pluto seized her--in that mighty grasp that will
not be denied, and Proserpine wept childish tears as she shivered at
his icy touch, and sobbed because she had dropped the flowers she had
picked, and had never picked the flower she most desired. While still
she saw the fair light of day, the little oddly-shaped rocky hills,
the vineyards and olive groves and flowery meadows of Sicily, she did
not lose hope. Surely the King of Terrors could not steal one so
young, so happy, and so fair. She had only tasted the joy of living,
and fain she would drink deeper in the coming years. Her mother must
surely save her--her mother who had never yet failed her--her mother,
and the gods.

But ruthless as the mower whose scythe cuts down the seeded grass and
the half-opened flower and lays them in swathes on the meadow, Pluto
drove on. His iron-coloured reins were loose on the black manes of his
horses, and he urged them forward by name till the froth flew from
their mouths like the foam that the furious surf of the sea drives
before it in a storm. Across the bay and along the bank of the river
Anapus they galloped, until, at the river head, they came to the pool
of Cyane. He smote the water with his trident, and downward into the
blackness of darkness his horses passed, and Proserpine knew no more
the pleasant light of day.

    "What ails her that she comes not home?
    Demeter seeks her far and wide,
    And gloomy-browed doth ceaseless roam
    From many a morn till eventide.
    'My life, immortal though it be,
    Is nought,' she cries, 'for want of thee,
    Persephone--Persephone!'"

So, to the great Earth Mother came the pangs that have drawn tears of
blood from many a mortal mother's heart for a child borne off to the
Shades.

    "'My life is nought for want of thee,--
    Persephone! Persephone!'" ...

The cry is borne down through the ages, to echo and re-echo so long as
mothers love and Death is still unchained.

Over land and sea, from where Dawn, the rosy-fingered, rises in the
East, to where Apollo cools the fiery wheels of his chariot in the
waters of far western seas, the goddess sought her daughter. With a
black robe over her head and carrying a flaming torch in either hand,
for nine dreary days she sought her loved one. And yet, for nine more
weary days and nine sleepless nights the goddess, racked by human
sorrow, sat in hopeless misery. The hot sun beat upon her by day. By
night the silver rays from Diana's car smote her more gently, and the
dew drenched her hair and her black garments and mingled with the
saltness of her bitter tears. At the grey dawning of the tenth day her
elder daughter, Hecate, stood beside her. Queen of ghosts and shades
was she, and to her all dark places of the earth were known.

"Let us go to the Sun God," said Hecate. "Surely he hath seen the god
who stole away the little Proserpine. Soon his chariot will drive
across the heavens. Come, let us ask him to guide us to the place
where she is hidden."

Thus did they come to the chariot of the glorious Apollo, and standing
by the heads of his horses like two grey clouds that bar the passage
of the sun, they begged him to tell them the name of him who had
stolen fair Proserpine.

"No less a thief was he," said Apollo, "than Pluto, King of Darkness
and robber of Life itself. Mourn not, Demeter. Thy daughter is safe in
his keeping. The little nymph who played in the meadows is now Queen
of the Shades. Nor does Pluto love her vainly. She is now in love with
Death."

No comfort did the words of the Sun God bring to the longing soul of
Demeter. And her wounded heart grew bitter. Because she suffered,
others must suffer as well. Because she mourned, all the world must
mourn. The fragrant flowers spoke to her only of Persephone, the
purple grapes reminded her of a vintage when the white fingers of her
child had plucked the fruit. The waving golden grain told her that
Persephone was as an ear of wheat that is reaped before its time.

Then upon the earth did there come dearth and drought and barrenness.

    "The wheat
    Was blighted in the ear, the purple grapes
    Blushed no more on the vines, and all the gods
    Were sorrowful ..."

        Lewis Morris.

Gods and men alike suffered from the sorrow of Demeter. To her, in
pity for the barren earth, Zeus sent an embassy, but in vain it came.
Merciless was the great Earth Mother, who had been robbed of what she
held most dear.

"Give me back my child!" she said. "Gladly I watch the sufferings of
men, for no sorrow is as my sorrow. Give me back my child, and the
earth shall grow fertile once more."

Unwillingly Zeus granted the request of Demeter.

"She shall come back," he said at last, "and with thee dwell on earth
forever. Yet only on one condition do I grant thy fond request.
Persephone must eat no food through all the time of her sojourn in the
realm of Pluto, else must thy beseeching be all in vain."

Then did Demeter gladly leave Olympus and hasten down to the darkness
of the shadowy land that once again she might hold, in her strong
mother's arms, her who had once been her little clinging child.

But in the dark kingdom of Pluto a strange thing had happened. No
longer had the pale-faced god, with dark locks, and eyes like the
sunless pools of a mountain stream, any terrors for Proserpine. He was
strong, and cruel had she thought him, yet now she knew that the touch
of his strong, cold hands was a touch of infinite tenderness. When,
knowing the fiat of the ruler of Olympus, Pluto gave to his stolen
bride a pomegranate, red in heart as the heart of a man, she had taken
it from his hand, and, because he willed it, had eaten of the sweet
seeds. Then, in truth, it was too late for Demeter to save her child.
She "had eaten of Love's seed" and "changed into another."

    "He takes the cleft pomegranate seeds:
    'Love, eat with me this parting day;'
    Then bids them fetch the coal-black steeds--
    'Demeter's daughter, wouldst away?'
    The gates of Hades set her free;
    'She will return full soon,' saith he--
    'My wife, my wife Persephone.'"

        Ingelow.

Dark, dark was the kingdom of Pluto. Its rivers never mirrored a
sunbeam, and ever moaned low as an earthly river moans before a coming
flood, and the feet that trod the gloomy Cocytus valley were the feet
of those who never again would tread on the soft grass and flowers of
an earthly meadow. Yet when Demeter had braved all the shadows of
Hades, only in part was her end accomplished. In part only was
Proserpine now her child, for while half her heart was in the
sunshine, rejoicing in the beauties of earth, the other half was with
the god who had taken her down to the Land of Darkness and there had
won her for his own. Back to the flowery island of Sicily her mother
brought her, and the peach trees and the almonds blossomed snowily as
she passed. The olives decked themselves with their soft grey leaves,
the corn sprang up, green and lush and strong. The lemon and orange
groves grew golden with luscious fruit, and all the land was carpeted
with flowers. For six months of the year she stayed, and gods and men
rejoiced at the bringing back of Proserpine. For six months she left
her green and pleasant land for the dark kingdom of him whom she
loved, and through those months the trees were bare, and the earth
chill and brown, and under the earth the flowers hid themselves in
fear and awaited the return of the fair daughter of Demeter.

And evermore has she come and gone, and seedtime and harvest have
never failed, and the cold, sleeping world has awaked and rejoiced,
and heralded with the song of birds, and the bursting of green buds
and the blooming of flowers, the resurrection from the dead--the
coming of spring.

    "Time calls, and Change
    Commands both men and gods, and speeds us on
    We know not whither; but the old earth smiles
    Spring after spring, and the seed bursts again
    Out of its prison mould, and the dead lives
    Renew themselves, and rise aloft and soar
    And are transformed, clothing themselves with change,
    Till the last change be done."

        Lewis Morris.


FOOTNOTE:

[5] Jean Ingelow.




LATONA AND THE RUSTICS


Through the tropic nights their sonorous, bell-like booming can be
heard coming up from the marshes, and when they are unseen, the song
of the bull-frogs would suggest creatures full of solemn dignity. The
croak of their lesser brethren is less impressive, yet there is no
escape from it on those evenings when the dragon-flies' iridescent
wings are folded in sleep, and the birds in the branches are still,
when the lilies on the pond have closed their golden hearts, and even
the late-feeding trout have ceased to plop and to make eddies in the
quiet water. "Krroak! krroak! krroak!" they go--"krroak! krroak!
krroak!"

It is unceasing, unending. It goes on like the whirr of the wheels of
a great clock that can never run down--a melancholy complaint against
the hardships of destiny--a raucous protest against things as they
are.

This is the story of the frogs that have helped to point the gibes of
Aristophanes, the morals of √Üsop, and which have always been, more or
less, regarded as the low comedians of the animal world.

Latona, or Leto, was the goddess of dark nights, and upon her the
mighty Zeus bestowed the doubtful favour of his errant love. Great was
the wrath of Hera, his queen, when she found that she was no longer
the dearest wife of her omnipotent lord, and with furious upbraidings
she banished her rival to earth. And when Latona had reached the place
of her exile she found that the vengeful goddess had sworn that she
would place her everlasting ban upon anyone, mortal or immortal, who
dared to show any kindness or pity to her whose only fault had been
that Zeus loved her. From place to place she wandered, an outcast even
among men, until, at length, she came to Lycia.

One evening, as the darkness of which she was goddess had just begun
to fall, she reached a green and pleasant valley. The soft, cool grass
was a delight to her tired feet, and when she saw the silvery gleam of
water she rejoiced, for her throat was parched and her lips dry and
she was very weary. By the side of this still pond, where the lilies
floated, there grew lithe grey willows and fresh green osiers, and
these were being cut by a crowd of chattering rustics.

Humbly, for many a rude word and harsh rebuff had the dictum of Hera
brought her during her wanderings, Latona went to the edge of the
pond, and, kneeling down, was most thankfully about to drink, when the
peasants espied her. Roughly and rudely they told her to begone, nor
dare to drink unbidden of the clear water beside which their willows
grew. Very pitifully Latona looked up in their churlish faces, and her
eyes were as the eyes of a doe that the hunters have pressed very
hard.

"Surely, good people," she said, and her voice was sad and low, "water
is free to all. Very far have I travelled, and I am aweary almost to
death. Only grant that I dip my lips in the water for one deep
draught. Of thy pity grant me this boon, for I perish of thirst."

Harsh and coarse were the mocking voices that made answer. Coarser
still were the jests that they made. Then one, bolder than his
fellows, spurned her kneeling figure with his foot, while another
brushed before her and stepping into the pond, defiled its clarity by
churning up the mud that lay below with his great splay feet.

Loudly the peasants laughed at this merry jest, and they quickly
followed his lead, as brainless sheep will follow the one that
scrambles through a gap. Soon they were all joyously stamping and
dancing in what had so lately been a pellucid pool. The water-lilies
and blue forget-me-nots were trodden down, the fish that had their
homes under the mossy stones in terror fled away. Only the mud came
up, filthy, defiling, and the rustics laughed in loud and foolish
laughter to see the havoc they had wrought.

The goddess Latona rose from her knees. No longer did she seem a mere
woman, very weary, hungry and athirst, travelled over far. In their
surprised eyes she grew to a stature that was as that of the deathless
gods. And her eyes were dark as an angry sea at even.

"Shameless ones!" she said, in a voice as the voice of a storm that
sweeps destroyingly over forest and mountain. "Ah! shameless ones! Is
it thus that thou wouldst defy one who has dwelt on Olympus? Behold
from henceforth shalt thou have thy dwelling in the mud of the
green-scummed pools, thy homes in the water that thy flat feet have
defiled."

As she spoke, a change, strange and terrible, passed over the forms of
the trampling peasants. Their stature shrank. They grew squat and fat.
Their hands and feet were webbed, and their grinning mouths became
great, sad, gaping openings by which to swallow worms and flies. Green
and yellow and brown were their skins, and when they would fain have
cried aloud for mercy, from their throats there would come only the
"_Krroak! krroak! krroak!_" that we know so well.

And when, that night, the goddess of darkness was wrapped in peace in
the black, silver star bespangled robe that none could take from her,
there arose from the pond over which the grey willows hung, weeping,
the clamour of a great lamentation. Yet no piteous words were there,
only the incessant, harsh complaint of the frogs that we hear in the
marshes.

From that time the world went well with Latona. Down to the seashore
she came, and when she held out her arms in longing appeal to the
√Ügean islands that lay like purple flowers strewn, far apart, on a
soft carpet of limpid blue, Zeus heard her prayer. He asked Poseidon
to send a dolphin to carry the woman he loved to the floating island
of Delos, and when she had been borne there in safety, he chained the
island with chains of adamant to the golden-sanded floor of the sea.

And on this sanctuary there were born to Latona twin children,
thereafter to be amongst the most famed of the deathless gods--the
god and goddess, Apollo and Diana.

    "... Those hinds that were transformed to frogs
    Railed at Latona's twin-born progeny,
    Which after held the sun and moon in fee."

        Milton.

Yet are there times, as we look at the squat, bronze bodies of the
frogs--green-bronze, dark brown spotted, and all flecked with gold,
the turned-down corners of their wistful mouths, their very exquisite
black velvety eyes with golden rims--when the piteous croaks that come
forth from their throats of pale daffodil colour do indeed awake a
sympathy with their appeal against the inexorable decrees of destiny.

"We did not know! We did not understand! Pity us! Ah, pity us!
_Krroak! krroak! krroak!_"




ECHO AND NARCISSUS


In the solitudes of the hills we find her, and yet we may come on her
unawares in the din of a noisy city. She will answer us where the
waves are lashing themselves against the rugged cliffs of our own
British coast, or we may find her where the great yellow pillars of
fallen temples lie hot in the sun close to the vivid blue water of the
African sea. At nightfall, on the lonely northern moors, she mimics
the cry of a wailing bird that calls for its mate, but it is she who
prolongs the roll of the great organ in a vast cathedral, she who
repeats the rattle and crack and boom of the guns, no matter in what
land the war may be raging. In the desolate Australian bush she makes
the crash of the falling limb of a dead gum tree go on and on, and
tortures the human being who is lost, hopelessly lost, and facing a
cruel death, by repeating his despairing calls for help. Through the
night, in old country-houses, she sports at will and gives new life to
sad old tales of the restless dead who restlessly walk. But she echoes
the children's voices as they play by the seashore or pick primroses
in the woods in spring, and when they greet her with laughter, she
laughs in merry response. They may fear her when the sun has gone
down, and when they are left all alone they begin to dread her
mockery. Yet the nymph who sought for love and failed to gain what
she sought must surely find some comfort on those bright days of
summer and of spring when she gives the little children happiness and
they give her their love.

When all the world was young, and nymphs and fauns and dryads dwelt in
the forests, there was no nymph more lovely and more gay than she
whose name was Echo. Diana would smile on her for her fleetness of
foot when she followed her in the chase, and those whom she met in the
leafy pathways of the dim, green woods, would pass on smiling at the
remembrance of her merry chatter and her tricksy humour.

It was an evil day for Echo when she crossed the path of Hera, queen
of the gods. The jealous goddess sought her errant husband, who was
amusing himself with some nymphs, and Echo, full of mischievous glee,
kept her in talk until the nymphs had fled to safety. Hera was furious
indeed when she found out that a frolicsome nymph had dared to play on
her such a trick, and ruthlessly she spoke fair Echo's doom.

"Henceforth," she said, "the tongue with which thou hast cheated me
shall be in bonds. No longer wilt thou have the power to speak in
greeting. To the tongues of others shall thy tongue be slave, and from
this day until time shall cease thou shalt speak only to repeat the
last words that have fallen on thine ears."

A maimed nymph indeed was Echo then, yet whole in all that matters
most, in that her merry heart was still her own. But only for a little
while did this endure.

Narcissus, the beautiful son of a nymph and a river god, was hunting
in a lonely forest one day when Echo saw him pass. To her he seemed
more fair than god or man, and once she had seen him she knew that she
must gain his love or die. From that day on, she haunted him like his
shadow, gliding from tree to tree, nestling down amongst thick fern
and undergrowth, motionless as one who stalks a wild thing, watching
him afar off while he rested, gladdening her eyes with his beauty. So
did she feed her hungering heart, and sought to find contentment by
looking on his face each day.

To her at length came a perfect moment when Narcissus was separated
from his companions in the chase and, stopping suddenly where the
evening sun chequered the pathway of the forest with black and gold,
heard the nymph's soft footfall on the rustling leaves.

"Who's here?" he called.

"_Here!_" answered Echo.

Narcissus, peering amongst the trees' long shadows and seeing no one,
called "Come!"

And "_Come!_" called the glad voice of Echo, while the nymph, with
fast-beating heart, felt that her day of happiness had come indeed.

"Why do you shun me?" then called Narcissus.

"_Why do you shun me?_" Echo repeated.

"Let us join one another," said the lad, and the simple words seemed
turned into song when Echo said them over.

"_Let us join one another!_" she said, and not Eos herself, as with
rosy fingers she turns aside the dark clouds of night, could be fairer
than was the nymph as she pushed aside the leaves of the trackless
wood, and ran forward with white arms outstretched to him who was lord
of her life.

[Illustration: SHE HAUNTED HIM LIKE HIS SHADOW]

With cold eyes and colder heart the one she loved beheld her.

"Away!" he cried, shrinking back as if from something that he hated.
"_Away!_ I would rather die than that you should have me!"

"_Have me!_" cried Echo pitifully, but she pled in vain. Narcissus had
no love to give her, and his scorn filled her with shame. Thenceforth
in the forest revels she never more was seen, and the nymphs danced
gaily as ever, with never a care for her who had faded and gone away
as completely as though she were a blossom in the passing of spring.
In the solitude of mountain cliffs and caves and rocky places, and in
the loneliest depths of the forest, Echo hid her grief, and when the
winds blew through the dark branches of the trees at night, moaning
and sighing, they could hear far below them the voice of Echo
repeating their lamentations. For her, long nights followed hopeless
days, and nights and days only told her that her love was all in vain.
Then came a night when the winds no longer saw the figure of the
nymph, white and frail as a broken flower, crouching close to the
rocks they passed over. Grief had slain the body of Echo. Only her
voice was left to repeat their mocking laughter, their wistful
sighs--only her voice that lives on still though all the old gods are
gone, and but few there are who know her story.

Heartwhole and happy, Narcissus, slayer of happiness, went on his
way, and other nymphs besides fair Echo suffered from loving him in
vain. One nymph, less gentle than Echo, poured the tale of her love
that was scorned into the sympathetic ears of the goddess of Love, and
implored her to punish Narcissus.

Hot and tired from the chase, Narcissus sought one day a lonely pool
in the woods, there to rest and to quench his thirst.

    "In some delicious ramble, he had found
    A little space, with boughs all woven round;
    And in the midst of all, a clearer pool
    Than e'er reflected in its pleasant cool
    The blue sky here, and there, serenely peeping
    Through tendril wreaths fantastically creeping."

As he stooped down to drink, a face looked at his through the crystal
clear water, and a pair of beautiful eyes met his own. His surprise
and joy at the sight of what he felt sure must be the most beautiful
creature on earth, was evidently shared by the nymph of the pool, who
gazed fearlessly up at him.

Round her head she had a nimbus of curls than which that of
Adonis--nay, of the sun-god himself, was not more perfect, while her
eyes were like the brown pools of water in a rippling mountain stream,
flecked with sunshine, yet with depths untold. When Narcissus smiled
at her in rapture, her red lips also parted in a smile. He stretched
out his arms towards her, and her arms were stretched to him. Almost
trembling in his delight, he slowly stooped to kiss her. Nearer she
drew to him, nearer still, but when his mouth would have given itself
to that other mouth that was formed like the bow of Eros--a thing to
slay hearts--only the chilly water of the pool touched his lips, and
the thing of his delight vanished away. In passionate disappointment
Narcissus waited for her to return, and as soon as the water of the
pool grew still, once more he saw her exquisite face gazing wistfully
up into his. Passionately he pled with the beautiful creature--spoke
of his love--besought her to have pity on him, but although the face
in the pool reflected his every look of adoration and of longing, time
and again he vainly tried to clasp in his arms what was but the
mirrored likeness of himself.

In full measure had the avenging goddess meted out to Narcissus the
restless longing of unsatisfied love. By day and by night he haunted
the forest pool, and ere long the face that looked back at his was
pale as a lily in the dawn. When the moonbeams came straying down
through the branches and all the night was still, they found him
kneeling by the pool, and the white face that the water mirrored had
the eyes of one of the things of the woods to which a huntsman has
given a mortal wound. Mortally wounded he truly was, slain, like many
another since his day, by a hopeless love for what was in truth but an
image, and that an image of his own creation. Even when his shade
passed across the dark Stygian river, it stooped over the side of the
boat that it might try to catch a glimpse of the beloved one in the
inky waters.

Echo and the other nymphs were avenged, yet when they looked on the
beautiful dead Narcissus, they were filled with sorrow, and when they
filled the air with their lamentations, most piteously did the voice
of Echo repeat each mournful cry. Even the gods were pitiful, and when
the nymphs would have burned the body on a funeral pyre which their
own fair hands had built for him, they sought it in vain. For the
Olympians had turned Narcissus into a white flower, the flower that
still bears his name and keeps his memory sweet.

                  "A lonely flower he spied,
    A meek and forlorn flower, with naught of pride,
    Drooping its beauty o'er the watery clearness,
    To woo its own sad image into nearness;
    Deaf to light Zephyrus it would not move,
    But still would seem to droop, to pine, to love."

        Keats.




ICARUS


Fourteen years only have passed since our twentieth century began. In
those fourteen years how many a father's and mother's heart has bled
for the death of gallant sons, greatly-promising, greatly-daring, who
have sought to rule the skies? With wings not well enough tried, they
have soared dauntlessly aloft, only to add more names to the tragic
list of those whose lives have been sacrificed in order that the
groping hands of science may become sure, so that in time the sons of
men may sail through the heavens as fearlessly as their fathers sailed
through the seas.

High overhead we watch the monoplane, the great, swooping thing, like
a monster black-winged bird, and our minds travel back to the story of
Icarus, who died so many years ago that there are those who say that
his story is but a foolish fable, an idle myth.

D√¶dalus, grandson of a king of Athens, was the greatest artificer of
his day. Not only as an architect was he great, but as a sculptor he
had the creative power, not only to make men and women and animals
that looked alive, but to cause them to move and to be, to all
appearances, endowed with life. To him the artificers who followed him
owed the invention of the axe, the wedge, the wimble, and the
carpenter's level, and his restless mind was ever busy with new
inventions. To his nephew, Talus, or Perdrix, he taught all that he
himself knew of all the mechanical arts. Soon it seemed that the
nephew, though he might not excel his uncle, equalled D√¶dalus in his
inventive power. As he walked by the seashore, the lad picked up the
spine of a fish, and, having pondered its possibilities, he took it
home, imitated it in iron, and so invented the saw. A still greater
invention followed this. While those who had always thought that there
could be none greater than D√¶dalus were still acclaiming the lad,
there came to him the idea of putting two pieces of iron together,
connecting them at one end with a rivet, and sharpening both ends, and
a pair of compasses was made. Louder still were the acclamations of
the people. Surely greater than D√¶dalus was here. Too much was this
for the artist's jealous spirit.

One day they stood together on the top of the Acropolis, and D√¶dalus,
murder that comes from jealousy in his heart, threw his nephew down.
Down, down he fell, knowing well that he was going to meet a cruel
death, but Pallas Athen√©, protectress of all clever craftsmen, came to
his rescue. By her Perdrix was turned into the bird that still bears
his name, and D√¶dalus beheld Perdrix, the partridge, rapidly winging
his way to the far-off fields. Since then, no partridge has ever built
or roosted in a high place, but has nestled in the hedge-roots and
amongst the standing corn, and as we mark it we can see that its
flight is always low.

For his crime D√¶dalus was banished from Athens, and in the court of
Minos, king of Crete, he found a refuge. He put all his mighty powers
at the service of Minos, and for him designed an intricate labyrinth
which, like the river Meander, had neither beginning nor ending, but
ever returned on itself in hopeless intricacy. Soon he stood high in
the favour of the king, but, ever greedy for power, he incurred, by
one of his daring inventions, the wrath of Minos. The angry monarch
threw him into prison, and imprisoned along with him his son, Icarus.
But prison bars and locks did not exist that were strong enough to
baffle this master craftsman, and from the tower in which they were
shut, D√¶dalus and his son were not long in making their escape. To
escape from Crete was a less easy matter. There were many places in
that wild island where it was easy for the father and son to hide, but
the subjects of Minos were mostly mariners, and D√¶dalus knew well that
all along the shore they kept watch lest he should make him a boat,
hoist on it one of the sails of which he was part inventor, and speed
away to safety like a sea-bird driven before the gale. Then did there
come to D√¶dalus, the pioneer of inventions, the great idea that by his
skill he might make a way for himself and his son through another
element than water. And he laughed aloud in his hiding place amongst
the cypresses on the hillside at the thought of how he would baffle
the simple sailormen who watched each creek and beach down on the
shore. Mockingly, too, did he think of King Minos, who had dared to
pit his power against the wits and skill of D√¶dalus, the mighty
craftsman.

Many a Cretan bird was sacrificed before the task which the inventor
had set himself was accomplished. In a shady forest on the mountains
he fashioned light wooden frames and decked them with feathers, until
at length they looked like the pinions of a great eagle, or of a swan
that flaps its majestic way from lake to river. Each feather was bound
on with wax, and the mechanism of the wings was so perfect a
reproduction of that of the wings from which the feathers had been
plucked, that on the first day that he fastened them to his back and
spread them out, D√¶dalus found that he could fly even as the bird
flew. Two pairs he made; having tested one pair, a second pair was
made for Icarus, and, circling round him like a mother bird that
teaches her nestlings how to fly, D√¶dalus, his heart big with the
pride of invention, showed Icarus how he might best soar upwards to
the sun or dive down to the blue sea far below, and how he might
conquer the winds and the air currents of the sky and make them his
servants.

That was a joyous day for father and son, for the father had never
before drunk deeper of the intoxicating wine of the gods--Success--and
for the lad it was all pure joy. Never before had he known freedom and
power so utterly glorious. As a little child he had watched the birds
fly far away over the blue hills to where the sun was setting, and had
longed for wings that he might follow them in their flight. At times,
in his dreams, he had known the power, and in his dreaming fancy had
risen from the cumbering earth and soared high above the trees and
fields on strong pinions that bore him away to the fair land of
heart's desire--to the Islands of the Blessed. But when Sleep left
him and the dreams silently slipped out before the coming of the light
of day, and the boy sprang from his couch and eagerly spread his arms
as, in his dreams, he had done, he could no longer fly. Disappointment
and unsatisfied longing ever came with his waking hours. Now all that
had come to an end, and D√¶dalus was glad and proud as well to watch
his son's joy and his fearless daring. One word of counsel only did he
give him.

"Beware, dear son of my heart," he said, "lest in thy new-found power
thou seekest to soar even to the gates of Olympus. For as surely as
the scorching rays from the burnished wheels of the chariot of Apollo
smite thy wings, the wax that binds on thy feathers will melt, and
then will come upon thee and on me woe unutterable."

In his dreams that night Icarus flew, and when he awoke, fearing to
find only the haunting remembrance of a dream, he found his father
standing by the side of his bed of soft leaves under the shadowy
cypresses, ready to bind on his willing shoulders the great pinions
that he had made.

Gentle Dawn, the rosy-fingered, was slowly making her way up from the
East when D√¶dalus and Icarus began their flight. Slowly they went at
first, and the goat-herds who tended their flocks on the slopes of
Mount Ida looked up in fear when they saw the dark shadows of their
wings and marked the monster birds making their way out to sea. From
the river beds the waterfowl arose from the reeds, and with great
outcry flew with all their swiftness to escape them. And down by the
seashore the mariners' hearts sank within them as they watched,
believing that a sight so strange must be a portent of disaster.
Homewards they went in haste to offer sacrifices on the altars of
Poseidon, ruler of the deep.

Samos and Delos were passed on the left and Lebynthos on the right,
long ere the sun-god had started on his daily course, and as the
mighty wings of Icarus cleft the cold air, the boy's slim body grew
chilled, and he longed for the sun's rays to turn the waters of the
√Ügean Sea over which he flew from green-grey into limpid sapphire and
emerald and burning gold. Towards Sicily he and his father bent their
course, and when they saw the beautiful island afar off lying like a
gem in the sea, Apollo made the waves in which it lay, for it a
fitting setting. With a cry of joy Icarus marked the sun's rays paint
the chill water, and Apollo looked down at the great white-winged
bird, a snowy swan with the face and form of a beautiful boy, who sped
exulting onwards, while a clumsier thing, with wings of darker hue,
followed less quickly, in the same line of flight. As the god looked,
the warmth that radiated from his chariot touched the icy limbs of
Icarus as with the caressing touch of gentle, life-giving hands. Not
long before, his flight had lagged a little, but now it seemed as if
new life was his. Like a bird that wheels and soars and dives as if
for lightness of heart, so did Icarus, until each feather of his
plumage had a sheen of silver and of gold. Down, down, he darted, so
near the water that almost the white-tipped waves caught at his wings
as he skimmed over them. Then up, up, up he soared, ever higher,
higher still, and when he saw the radiant sun-god smiling down on
him, the warning of D√¶dalus was forgotten. As he had excelled other
lads in foot races, now did Icarus wish to excel the birds themselves.
D√¶dalus he left far behind, and still upwards he mounted. So strong he
felt, so fearless was he, that to him it seemed that he could storm
Olympus, that he could call to Apollo as he swept past him in his
flight, and dare him to race for a wager from the √Ügean Sea to where
the sun-god's horses took their nightly rest by the trackless seas of
the unknown West.

In terror his father watched him, and as he called to him in a voice
of anguished warning that was drowned by the whistling rush of the air
currents through the wings of Icarus and the moist whisper of the
clouds as through them he cleft a way for himself, there befell the
dreaded thing. It seemed as though the strong wings had begun to lose
their power. Like a wounded bird Icarus fluttered, lunged sidewise
from the straight, clean line of his flight, recovered himself, and
fluttered again. And then, like the bird into whose soft breast the
sure hand of a mighty archer has driven an arrow, downwards he fell,
turning over and yet turning again, downwards, ever downwards, until
he fell with a plunge into the sea that still was radiant in shining
emerald and translucent blue.

Then did the car of Apollo drive on. His rays had slain one who was
too greatly daring, and now they fondled the little white feathers
that had fallen from the broken wings and floated on the water like
the petals of a torn flower.

On the dead, still face of Icarus they shone, and they spangled as if
with diamonds the wet plumage that still, widespread, bore him up on
the waves.

Stricken at heart was D√¶dalus, but there was no time to lament his
son's untimely end, for even now the black-prowed ships of Minos might
be in pursuit. Onward he flew to safety, and in Sicily built a temple
to Apollo, and there hung up his wings as a propitiatory offering to
the god who had slain his son.

And when grey night came down on that part of the sea that bears the
name of Icarus to this day, still there floated the body of the boy
whose dreams had come true. For only a little while had he known the
exquisite realisation of dreamed-of potentialities, for only a few
hours tasted the sweetness of perfect pleasure, and then, by an
over-daring flight, had lost it all for ever.

The sorrowing Nereids sang a dirge over him as he was swayed gently
hither and thither by the tide, and when the silver stars came out
from the dark firmament of heaven and were reflected in the blackness
of the sea at night, it was as though a velvet pall, silver-decked in
his honour, was spread around the slim white body with its
outstretched snowy wings.

So much had he dared--so little accomplished.

Is it not the oft-told tale of those who have followed Icarus? Yet who
can say that gallant youth has lived in vain when, as Icarus did, he
has breasted the very skies, has flown with fearless heart and soul to
the provinces of the deathless gods?--when, even for the space of a
few of the heart-beats of Time, he has tasted supreme power--the
ecstasy of illimitable happiness?




CLYTIE


The sunbeams are basking on the high walls of the old garden--smiling
on the fruit that grows red and golden in their warmth. The bees are
humming round the bed of purple heliotrope, and drowsily murmuring in
the shelter of the soft petals of the blush roses whose sweetness
brings back the fragrance of days that are gone. On the old grey
sundial the white-winged pigeons sleepily croon as they preen their
snowy plumage, and the Madonna lilies hang their heads like a
procession of white-robed nuns who dare not look up from telling their
beads until the triumphal procession of an all-conquering warrior has
gone by. What can they think of that long line of tall yellow flowers
by the garden wall, who turn their faces sunwards with an arrogant
assurance, and give stare for stare to golden-haired Apollo as he
drives his blazing car triumphant through the high heavens?

"Sunflowers" is the name by which we know those flamboyant blossoms
which somehow fail so wholly to suggest the story of Clytie, the nymph
whose destruction came from a faithful, unrequited love. She was a
water-nymph, a timid, gentle being who frequented lonely streams, and
bathed where the blue dragon-flies dart across the white water-lilies
in pellucid lakes. In the shade of the tall poplar trees and the
silvery willows she took her midday rest, and feared the hours when
the flowers drooped their heads and the rippling water lost its
coolness before the fierce glare of the sun.

But there came a day when, into the dark pool by which she sat, Apollo
the Conqueror looked down and mirrored his face. And nevermore did she
hide from the golden-haired god who, from the moment when she had seen
in the water the picture of his radiant beauty, became the lord and
master of her heart and soul. All night she awaited his coming, and
the Dawn saw her looking eastward for the first golden gleams from the
wheels of his chariot. All day she followed him with her longing gaze,
nor did she ever cease to feast her eyes upon his beauty until the
last reflection of his radiance had faded from the western sky.

Such devotion might have touched the heart of the sun-god, but he had
no wish to own a love for which he had not sought. The nymph's
adoration irked him, nor did pity come as Love's pale substitute when
he marked how, day by day, her face grew whiter and more white, and
her lovely form wasted away. For nine days, without food or drink, she
kept her shamed vigil. Only one word of love did she crave. Unexacting
in the humility of her devotion, she would gratefully have nourished
her hungry heart upon one kindly glance. But Apollo, full of scorn and
anger, lashed up his fiery steeds as he each day drove past her, nor
deigned for her a glance more gentle than that which he threw on the
satyrs as they hid in the dense green foliage of the shadowy woods.

Half-mocking, Diana said, "In truth the fair nymph who throws her
heart's treasures at the feet of my golden-locked brother that he may
trample on them, is coming to look like a faded flower!" And, as she
spoke, the hearts of the other immortal dwellers in Olympus were
stirred with pity.

"A flower she shall be!" they said, "and for all time shall she live,
in life that is renewed each year when the earth stirs with the
quickening of spring. The long summer days shall she spend forever in
fearless worship of the god of her love!"

And, as they willed, the nymph passed out of her human form, and took
the form of a flower, and evermore--the emblem of constancy--does she
gaze with fearless ardour on the face of her love.

    "The heart that has truly loved never forgets,
      But as truly loves on to the close;
    As the sunflower turns on her god when he sets
      The same look that she turned when he rose."

Some there are who say that not into the bold-faced sunflower did her
metamorphosis take place, but into that purple heliotrope that gives
an exquisite offering of fragrance to the sun-god when his warm rays
touch it. And in the old walled garden, while the bees drowsily hum,
and the white pigeons croon, and the dashing sunflower gives Apollo
gaze for gaze, and the scent of the mignonette mingles with that of
clove pinks and blush roses, the fragrance of the heliotrope is, above
all, worthy incense to be offered upon his altar by the devout lover
of a god.




THE CRANES OF IBYCUS

    "For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
    With most miraculous organ."

        Shakespeare.


Ibycus, the poet friend of Apollo, was a happy man as he journeyed on
foot through the country where the wild flowers grew thick and the
trees were laden with blossom towards the city of Corinth. His tuneful
voice sang snatches of song of his own making, and ever and again he
would try how his words and music sounded on his lyre. He was light of
heart, because ever had he thought of good, and not evil, and had
always sung only of great and noble deeds and of those things that
helped his fellow-men. And now he went to Corinth for the great
chariot-races, and for the great contest of musicians where every true
poet and musician in Greece was sure to be found.

It was the time of the return to earth of Adonis and of Proserpine,
and as he was reverently about to enter the sacred grove of Poseidon,
where the trees grew thick, and saw, crowning the height before him,
the glittering towers of Corinth, he heard, overhead, the harsh cries
of some other returned exiles. Ibycus smiled, as he looked up and
beheld the great flock of grey birds, with their long legs and strong,
outstretched wings, come back from their winter sojourn on the golden
sands of Egypt, to dance and beck and bow to each other by the marshes
of his homeland.

"Welcome back, little brothers!" he cried. "May you and I both meet
with naught but kindness from the people of this land!"

And when the cranes again harshly cried, as if in answer to his
greeting, the poet walked gaily on, further into the shadow of that
dark wood out of which he was never to pass as living man. Joyous, and
fearing no evil, he had been struck and cast to the ground by cruel
and murderous hands ere ever he knew that two robbers were hidden in a
narrow pass where the brushwood grew thick. With all his strength he
fought, but his arms were those of a musician and not of a warrior,
and very soon he was overpowered by those who assailed him. He cried
in vain to gods and to men for help, and in his final agony he heard
once more the harsh voices of the migratory birds and the rush of
their speeding wings. From the ground, where he bled to death, he
looked up to them.

"Take up my cause, dear cranes!" he said, "since no voice but yours
answers my cry!"

And the cranes screamed hoarsely and mournfully as if in farewell, as
they flapped their way towards Corinth and left the poet lying dead.

When his body was found, robbed and terribly wounded, from all over
Greece, where he was known and loved, there uprose a great clamour of
lamentation.

"Is it thus I find you restored to me?" said he who had expected him
in Corinth as his honoured guest; "I who hoped to place the victor's
laurels on your head when you triumphed in the temple of song!"

And all those whom the loving personality of Ibycus and the charm of
his music had made his friends were alert and eager to avenge so foul
a murder. But none knew how the wicked deed had come to pass--none,
save the cranes.

Then came the day to which Ibycus had looked forward with such joy,
when thousands upon thousands of his countrymen sat in the theatre at
Cyprus and watched a play that stirred their hearts within them.

The theatre had for roof the blue vault of heaven; the sun served for
footlights and for the lights above the heads of those who acted. The
three Furies--the Eumenides--with their hard and cruel faces and snaky
locks, and with blood dripping from their eyes, were represented by
actors so great that the hearts of their beholders trembled within
them. In their dread hands lay the punishment of murder, of
inhospitality, of ingratitude, and of all the cruellest and basest of
crimes. Theirs was the duty of hurrying the doomed spirits entrusted
to their merciless care over the Phlegethon, the river of fire that
flows round Hades, and through the brazen gates that led to Torment,
and their robes were robes worn

    "With all the pomp of horror, dy'd in gore."

        Virgil.

In solemn cadence, while the thousands of beholders watched and
listened enthralled, the Furies walked round the theatre and sang
their song of terror:

"Woe! woe! to him whose hands are soiled with blood! The darkness
shall not hide him, nor shall his dread secret lie hidden even in the
bowels of the earth! He shall not seek by flight to escape us, for
vengeance is ours, and swifter than a hawk that strikes its quarry
shall we strike. Unwearying we pursue, nor are our swift feet and our
avenging arms made slow by pity. Woe! woe! to the shedder of innocent
blood, for nor peace nor rest is his until we have hurried his
tormented soul down to torture that shall endure everlastingly!"

As the listeners heard the dirge of doom, there were none who did not
think of Ibycus, the gentle-hearted poet, so much beloved and so
foully done to death, and in the tensity of the moment when the voices
ceased, a great thrill passed over the multitudes as a voice, shrill
with amazed horror, burst from one of the uppermost benches:

"_See there! see there! behold, comrade, the cranes of Ibycus!_"

Every eye looked upwards, and, harshly crying, there passed overhead
the flock of cranes to whom the poet had entrusted his dying message.
Then, like an electric shock, there came to all those who beheld the
knowledge that he who had cried aloud was the murderer of Ibycus.

"Seize him! seize him!" cried in unison the voices of thousands.
"Seize the man, and him to whom he spoke!"

Frantically the trembling wretch tried to deny his words, but it was
too late. The roar of the multitudes was as that of an angry sea that
hungers for its prey and will not be denied. He who had spoken and him
to whom he spoke were seized by a score of eager hands.

In white-faced terror, because the Furies had hunted them down, they
made confession of their crime and were put to death. And the flock of
grey-plumaged, rosy-headed cranes winged their way on to the marshes,
there to beck and bow to each other, and to dance in the golden
sunset, well content because their message was delivered, and Ibycus,
the poet-musician who had given them welcome, was avenged.




SYRINX

    "Is it because the wild-wood passion still lingers in
    our hearts, because still in our minds the voice of
    Syrinx lingers in melancholy music, the music of regret
    and longing, that for most of us there is so potent a
    spell in running waters?"

        Fiona Macleod.


As the evening shadows lengthen, and the night wind softly steals
through the trees, touching with restless fingers the still waters of
the little lochans that would fain have rest, there can be heard a
long, long whisper, like a sigh. There is no softer, sadder note to be
heard in all Pan's great orchestra, nor can one marvel that it should
be so, for the whisper comes from the reeds who gently sway their
heads while the wind passes over them as they grow by lonely lake or
river.

This is the story of Syrinx, the reed, as Ovid has told it to us.

In Arcadia there dwelt a nymph whose name was Syrinx. So fair she was
that for her dear sake fauns and satyrs forgot to gambol, and sat in
the green woods in thoughtful stillness, that they might see her as
she passed. But for none of them had Syrinx a word of kindness. She
had no wish for love.

    "But as for Love, truly I know him not,
    I have passionately turned my lips therefrom,
    And from that fate the careless gods allot."

        Lady Margaret Sackville.

To one only of the gods did she give her loyal allegiance. She
worshipped Diana, and with her followed the chase. As she lightly sped
through the forest she might have been Diana herself, and there were
those who said they would not know nymph from goddess, but that the
goddess carried a silver bow, while that of Syrinx was made of horn.
Fearless, and without a care or sorrow, Syrinx passed her happy days.
Not for all the gold of Midas would she have changed places with those
love-lorn nymphs who sighed their hearts out for love of a god or of a
man. Heartwhole, fancy free, gay and happy and lithe and strong, as a
young boy whose joy it is to run and to excel in the chase, was
Syrinx, whose white arms against the greenwood trees dazzled the eyes
of the watching fauns when she drew back her bow to speed an arrow at
the stag she had hunted since early dawn. Each morning that she awoke
was the morning of a day of joy; each night that she lay down to rest,
it was to sleep as a child who smiles in his sleep at the remembrance
of a perfect day.

But to Syrinx, who knew no fear, Fear came at last. She was returning
one evening from the shadowy hills, untired by the chase that had
lasted for many an hour, when, face to face, she met with one whom
hitherto she had only seen from afar. Of him the other nymphs spoke
often. Who was so great as Pan?--Pan, who ruled the woods. None could
stand against Pan. Those who defied him must ever come under his power
in the end. He was Fear; he was Youth; he was Joy; he was Love; he was
Beast; he was Power; he was Man; he was God. He was Life itself. So
did they talk, and Syrinx listened with a smile. Not Pan himself could
bring Fear to her.

Yet when he met her in the silent loneliness of a great forest and
stood in her path and gazed on her with eyes of joyous amazement that
one so fair should be in his kingdom without his having had knowledge
of it, Syrinx felt something come to her heart that never before had
assailed it.

Pan's head was crowned with sharp pine-leaves. His face was young and
beautiful, and yet older than the mountains and the seas. Sadness and
joy were in his eyes at the same time, and at the same moment there
looked out from them unutterable tenderness and merciless cruelty. For
only a little space of time did he stand and hold her eyes with his
own, and then in low caressing voice he spoke, and his words were like
the song of a bird to his mate, like the call of the earth to the sun
in spring, like the lap of the waves when they tell the rocks of their
eternal longing. Of love he spoke, of love that demanded love, and of
the nymph's most perfect beauty. Yet as he spoke, the unknown thing
came and smote with icy hands the heart of Syrinx.

"Ah! I have Fear! I have Fear!" she cried, and more cruel grew the
cruelty in the eyes of Pan, but his words were still the words of
passionate tenderness. Like a bird that trembles, helpless, before the
serpent that would slay it, so did Syrinx the huntress stand, and her
face in the shade of the forest was like a white lily in the night.
But when the god would have drawn her close to him and kissed her red
lips, Fear leapt to Terror, and Terror winged her feet. Never in the
chase with Diana had she run as now she ran. But like a rushing storm
did Pan pursue her, and when he laughed she knew that what the nymphs
had said was true--he was Power--he was Fear--he was Beast--he was
Life itself. The darkness of the forest swiftly grew more dark. The
climbing trails of ivy and the fragrant creeping plants caught her
flying feet and made her stumble. Branches and twigs grew alive and
snatched at her and baulked her as she passed. Trees blocked her path.
All Nature had grown cruel, and everywhere there seemed to her to be a
murmur of mocking laughter, laughter from the creatures of Pan,
echoing the merciless merriment of their lord and master. Nearer he
came, ever nearer. Almost she could feel his breath on her neck; but
even as he stretched out his arms to seize the nymph whose breath came
with sobs like that of a young doe spent by the chase, they reached
the brink of the river Ladon. And to her "watery sisters" the nymphs
of the river, Syrinx breathed a desperate prayer for pity and for
help, then stumbled forward, a quarry run to the death.

With an exultant shout, Pan grasped her as she fell. And lo, in his
arms he held no exquisite body with fiercely beating heart, but a
clump of slender reeds. Baffled he stood for a little space, and, as
he stood, the savagery of the beast faded from his eyes that were
fathomless as dark mountain tarns where the sun-rays seldom come, and
there came into them a man's unutterable woe. At the reeds by the
river he gazed, and sighed a great sigh, the sigh that comes from the
heart of a god who thinks of the pain of the world. Like a gentle
zephyr the sigh breathed through the reeds, and from the reeds there
came a sound as of the sobbing sorrow of the world's desire. Then Pan
drew his sharp knife, and with it he cut seven of the reeds that grew
by the murmuring river.

"Thus shalt thou still be mine, my Syrinx," he said.

Deftly he bound them together, cut them into unequal lengths, and
fashioned for himself an instrument, that to this day is called the
Syrinx, or Pan's Pipes.

So did the god make music.

And all that night he sat by the swift-flowing river, and the music
from his pipe of reeds was so sweet and yet so passing sad, that it
seemed as though the very heart of the earth itself were telling of
its sadness. Thus Syrinx still lives--still dies:

    "A note of music by its own breath slain,
    Blown tenderly from the frail heart of a reed,"

and as the evening light comes down on silent places and the trembling
shadows fall on the water, we can hear her mournful whisper through
the swaying reeds, brown and silvery-golden, that grow by lonely
lochan and lake and river.




THE DEATH OF ADONIS

    "The fairest youth that ever maiden's dream conceived."

        Lewis Morris.


The ideally beautiful woman, a subject throughout the centuries for
all the greatest powers of sculptor's and painter's art, is Venus, or
Aphrodite, goddess of beauty and of love. And he who shares with her
an unending supremacy of perfection of form is not one of the gods,
her equals, but a mortal lad, who was the son of a king.

As Aphrodite sported one day with Eros, the little god of love, by
accident she wounded herself with one of his arrows. And straightway
there came into her heart a strange longing and an ache such as the
mortal victims of the bow of Eros knew well. While still the ache
remained, she heard, in a forest of Cyprus, the baying of hounds and
the shouts of those who urged them on in the chase. For her the chase
possessed no charms, and she stood aside while the quarry burst
through the branches and thick undergrowth of the wood, and the hounds
followed in hot pursuit. But she drew her breath sharply, and her eyes
opened wide in amazed gladness, when she looked on the perfect beauty
of the fleet-footed hunter, who was only a little less swift than the
shining spear that sped from his hand with the sureness of a bolt from
the hand of Zeus. And she knew that this must be none other than
Adonis, son of the king of Paphos, of whose matchless beauty she had
heard not only the dwellers on earth, but the Olympians themselves
speak in wonder. While gods and men were ready to pay homage to his
marvellous loveliness, to Adonis himself it counted for nothing. But
in the vigour of his perfect frame he rejoiced; in his fleetness of
foot, in the power of that arm that Michael Angelo has modelled, in
the quickness and sureness of his aim, for the boy was a mighty hunter
with a passion for the chase.

Aphrodite felt that her heart was no longer her own, and knew that the
wound that the arrow of Eros had dealt would never heal until she knew
that Adonis loved her. No longer was she to be found by the Cytherian
shores or in those places once held by her most dear, and the other
gods smiled when they beheld her vying with Diana in the chase and
following Adonis as he pursued the roe, the wolf, and the wild boar
through the dark forest and up the mountain side. The pride of the
goddess of love must often have hung its head. For her love was a
thing that Adonis could not understand. He held her "Something better
than his dog, a little dearer than his horse," and wondered at her
whim to follow his hounds through brake and marsh and lonely forest.
His reckless courage was her pride and her torture. Because he was to
her so infinitely dear, his path seemed ever bestrewn with dangers.
But when she spoke to him with anxious warning and begged him to
beware of the fierce beasts that might one day turn on him and bring
him death, the boy laughed mockingly and with scorn.

There came at last a day when she asked him what he did on the morrow,
and Adonis told her with sparkling eyes that had no heed for her
beauty, that he had word of a wild boar, larger, older, more fierce
than any he had ever slain, and which, before the chariot of Diana
next passed over the land of Cyprus, would be lying dead with a
spear-wound through it.

With terrible foreboding, Aphrodite tried to dissuade him from his
venture.

    "O, be advised: thou know'st not what it is
    With javelin's point a churlish swine to gore,
    Whose tushes never sheathed he whetteth still,
    Like to a mortal butcher, bent to kill.

               *   *   *   *   *

    Alas, he naught esteems that face of thine,
    To which love's eyes pay tributary gazes;
    Nor thy soft hands, sweet lips, and crystal eyne,
    Whose full perfection all the world amazes;
    But having thee at vantage--wondrous dread!--
    Would root these beauties as he roots the mead."

        Shakespeare.

To all her warnings, Adonis would but give smiles. Ill would it become
him to slink abashed away before the fierceness of an old monster of
the woods, and, laughing in the pride of a whole-hearted boy at a
woman's idle fears, he sped homewards with his hounds.

With the gnawing dread of a mortal woman in her soul, Aphrodite spent
the next hours. Early she sought the forest that she might again plead
with Adonis, and maybe persuade him, for love of her, to give up the
perilous chase because she loved him so.

But even as the rosy gates of the Dawn were opening, Adonis had begun
his hunt, and from afar off the goddess could hear the baying of his
hounds. Yet surely their clamour was not that of hounds in full cry,
nor was it the triumphant noise that they so fiercely make as they
pull down their vanquished quarry, but rather was it baying, mournful
as that of the hounds of Hecate. Swift as a great bird, Aphrodite
reached the spot from whence came the sound that made her tremble.

Amidst the trampled brake, where many a hound lay stiff and dead,
while others, disembowelled by the tusks of the boar, howled aloud in
mortal agony, lay Adonis. As he lay, he "knew the strange, slow chill
which, stealing, tells the young that it is death."

And as, _in extremis_, he thought of past things, manhood came to
Adonis and he knew something of the meaning of the love of
Aphrodite--a love stronger than life, than time, than death itself.
His hounds and his spear seemed but playthings now. Only the
eternities remained--bright Life, and black-robed Death.

Very still he lay, as though he slept; marble-white, and beautiful as
a statue wrought by the hand of a god. But from the cruel wound in the
white thigh, ripped open by the boar's profaning tusk, the red blood
dripped, in rhythmic flow, crimsoning the green moss under him. With a
moan of unutterable anguish, Aphrodite threw herself beside him, and
pillowed his dear head in her tender arms. Then, for a little while,
life's embers flickered up, his cold lips tried to form themselves
into a smile of understanding and held themselves up to hers. And,
while they kissed, the soul of Adonis passed away.

    "A cruel, cruel wound on his thigh hath Adonis, but a
    deeper wound in her heart doth Cytherea[6] bear. About
    him his dear hounds are loudly baying, and the nymphs of
    the wild woods wail him; but Aphrodite with unbound
    locks through the glades goes wandering--wretched, with
    hair unbraided, with feet unsandalled, and the thorns as
    she passes wound her and pluck the blossom of her sacred
    blood. Shrill she wails as down the woodland she is
    borne.... And the rivers bewail the sorrows of
    Aphrodite, and the wells are weeping Adonis on the
    mountains. The flowers flush red for anguish, and
    Cytherea through all the mountain-knees, through every
    dell doth utter piteous dirge:

    "'_Woe, woe for Cytherea, he hath perished, the lovely
    Adonis!_'"

        Bion.

Passionately the god besought Zeus to give her back her lost love, and
when there was no answer to her prayers, she cried in bitterness: "Yet
shall I keep a memorial of Adonis that shall be to all everlasting!"
And, as she spoke, her tears and his blood, mingling together, were
turned into flowers.

"A tear the Paphian sheds for each blood-drop of Adonis, and tears and
blood on the earth are turned to flowers. The blood brings forth the
roses, the tears, the wind-flower."

Yet, even then, the grief of Aphrodite knew no abatement. And when
Zeus, wearied with her crying, heard her, to his amazement, beg to be
allowed to go down to the Shades that she might there endure eternal
twilight with the one of her heart, his soul was softened.

"Never can it be that the Queen of Love and of Beauty leaves Olympus
and the pleasant earth to tread for evermore the dark Cocytus valley,"
he said. "Nay, rather shall I permit the beauteous youth of thy love
to return for half of each year from the Underworld that thou and he
may together know the joy of a love that hath reached fruition."

Thus did it come to pass that when dark winter's gloom was past,
Adonis returned to the earth and to the arms of her who loved him.

    "But even in death, so strong is love,
    I could not wholly die; and year by year,
    When the bright springtime comes, and the earth lives,
    Love opens these dread gates, and calls me forth
    Across the gulf. Not here, indeed, she comes,
    Being a goddess and in heaven, but smooths
    My path to the old earth, where still I know
    Once more the sweet lost days, and once again
    Blossom on that soft breast, and am again
    A youth, and rapt in love; and yet not all
    As careless as of yore; but seem to know
    The early spring of passion, tamed by time
    And suffering, to a calmer, fuller flow,
    Less fitful, but more strong."

        Lewis Morris.

And when the time of the singing of birds has come, and the flowers
have thrown off their white snow pall, and the brown earth grows
radiant in its adornments of green blade and of fragrant blossom, we
know that Adonis has returned from his exile, and trace his footprints
by the fragile flower that is his very own, the white flower with the
golden heart, that trembles in the wind as once the white hands of a
grief-stricken goddess shook for sorrow.

"The flower of Death" is the name that the Chinese give to the
wind-flower--the wood-anemone. Yet surely the flower that was born of
tears and of blood tells us of a life that is beyond the grave--of a
love which is unending.

The cruel tusk of a rough, remorseless winter still yearly slays the
"lovely Adonis" and drives him down to the Shades. Yet we know that
Spring, with its _Sursum Corda_, will return as long as the earth
shall endure; even as the sun must rise each day so long as time shall
last, to make

    "Le ciel tout en fleur semble une immense rose
    Qu'un Adonis c√©leste a teinte de son sang."

        De Heredia.


FOOTNOTE:

[6] Aphrodite.




PAN

    "What was he doing, the great god Pan,
      Down in the reeds by the river?
    Spreading ruin and scattering ban,
    Splashing and paddling with hoofs of a goat,
    And breaking the golden lilies afloat
      With the dragon-fly on the river.

    He tore out a reed, the great god Pan,
      From the deep cool bed of the river:
    The limpid water turbidly ran,
    And the broken lilies a-dying lay,
    And the dragon-fly had fled away,
      Ere he brought it out of the river.

               *   *   *   *   *

    'This is the way,' laughed the great god Pan
      (Laughed while he sat by the river),
    'The only way, since gods began
    To make sweet music, they could succeed.'
    Then, dropping his mouth to a hole in the reed,
      He blew in power by the river.

    Sweet, sweet, sweet, O Pan!
      Piercing sweet by the river!
    Blinding sweet, O great god Pan!
    The sun on the hill forgot to die,
    And the lilies revived, and the dragon-fly
      Came back to dream on the river.

    Yet half a beast is the great god Pan,
      To laugh as he sits by the river,
    Making a poet out of a man:
    The true gods sigh for the cost and pain,
    For the reed which grows nevermore again
      As a reed with the reeds in the river."

        E. B. Browning.


Were we to take the whole of that immense construction of fable that
was once the religion of Greece, and treat it as a vast play in which
there were many thousands of actors, we should find that one of these
actors appeared again and again. In one scene, then in another, in
connection with one character, then with another, unexpectedly
slipping out from the shadows of the trees from the first act even to
the last, we should see Pan--so young and yet so old, so heedlessly
gay, yet so infinitely sad.

If, rather, we were to regard the mythology of Greece as a colossal
and wonderful piece of music, where the thunders of Jupiter and the
harsh hoof-beats of the fierce black steeds of Pluto, the king whose
coming none can stay, made way for the limpid melodies of Orpheus and
the rustling whisper of the footfall of nymphs and of fauns on the
leaves, through it all we should have an ever-recurring _motif_--the
clear, magical fluting of the pipes of Pan.

We have the stories of Pan and of Echo, of Pan and of Midas, of Pan
and Syrinx, of Pan and Selene, of Pan and Pitys, of Pan and Pomona.
Pan it was who taught Apollo how to make music. It was Pan who spoke
what he deemed to be comfort to the distraught Psyche; Pan who gave
Diana her hounds. The other gods had their own special parts in the
great play that at one time would have Olympus for stage, at another
the earth. Pan was Nature incarnate. He was the Earth itself.

Many are the stories of his genealogy, but the one that is given in
one of the Homeric hymns is that Hermes, the swift-footed young god,
wedded Dryope, the beautiful daughter of a shepherd in Arcadia, and
to them was born, under the greenwood tree, the infant, Pan. When
Dryope first looked on her child, she was smitten with horror, and
fled away from him. The deserted baby roared lustily, and when his
father, Hermes, examined him he found a rosy-cheeked thing with prick
ears and tiny horns that grew amongst his thick curls, and with the
dappled furry chest of a faun, while instead of dimpled baby legs he
had the strong, hairy hind legs of a goat. He was a fearless creature,
and merry withal, and when Hermes had wrapped him up in a hare skin,
he sped to Olympus and showed his fellow-gods the son that had been
born to him and the beautiful nymph of the forest. Baby though he was,
Pan made the Olympians laugh. He had only made a woman, his own
mother, cry; all others rejoiced at the new creature that had come to
increase their merriment. And Bacchus, who loved him most of all, and
felt that here was a babe after his own heart, bestowed on him the
name by which he was forever known--Pan, meaning _All_.

Thus Pan grew up, the earthly equal of the Olympians, and, as he grew,
he took to himself the lordship of woods and of solitary places. He
was king of huntsmen and of fishermen, lord of flocks and herds and of
all the wild creatures of the forest. All living, soulless things
owned him their master; even the wild bees claimed him as their
overlord. He was ever merry, and when a riot of music and of laughter
slew the stillness of the shadowy woods, it was Pan who led the
dancing throng of white-limbed nymphs and gambolling satyrs, for whom
he made melody from the pipes for whose creation a maid had perished.

Round his horns and thick curls he presently came to wear a crown of
sharp pine-leaves, remembrance of another fair nymph whose destruction
he had brought about.

Pitys listened to the music of Pan, and followed him even as the
children followed the Pied Piper of later story. And ever his playing
lured her further on and into more dangerous and desolate places,
until at length she stood on the edge of a high cliff whose pitiless
front rushed sheer down to cruel rocks far below. There Pan's music
ceased, and Pitys knew all the joy and the sorrow of the world as the
god held out his arms to embrace her. But neither Pan nor Pitys had
remembrance of Boreas, the merciless north wind, whose love the nymph
had flouted.

Ere Pan could touch her, a blast, fierce and strong as death, had
seized the nymph's fragile body, and as a wind of March tears from the
tree the first white blossom that has dared to brave the ruthless
gales, and casts it, torn and dying, to the earth, so did Boreas grip
the slender Pitys and dash her life out on the rocks far down below.
From her body sprang the pine tree, slender, erect, clinging for dear
life to the sides of precipices, and by the prickly wreath he always
wore, Pan showed that he held her in fond remembrance.

Joy, and youth, and force, and spring, was Pan to all the creatures
whose overlord he was. Pan meant the richness of the sap in the trees,
the lushness of grass and of the green stems of the blue hyacinths and
the golden daffodils; the throbbing of growth in the woodland and in
the meadows; the trilling of birds that seek for their mates and find
them; the coo of the doves on their nests of young; the arrogant
virility of bulls and of stags whose lowing and belling wake the
silence of the hills; the lightness of heart that made the nymphs
dance and sing, the fauns leap high, and shout aloud for very joy of
living. All of these things was Pan to those of his own kingdom.

Yet to the human men and women who had also listened to his playing,
Pan did not mean only joyousness. He was to them a force that many
times became a terror because of its sheer irresistibleness.

While the sun shone and the herdsmen could see the nodding white
cotton-grass, the asphodel, and the golden kingcups that hid the black
death-traps of the pitiless marshes, they had no fear of Pan. Nor in
the daytime, when in the woods the sunbeams played amongst the trees
and the birds sang of Spring and of love, and the syrinx sent an echo
from far away that made the little silver birches give a whispering
laugh of gladness and the pines cease to sigh, did man or maid have
any fear. Yet when darkness fell on the land, terror would come with
it, and, deep in their hearts, they would know that the terror was
Pan. Blindly, madly, they would flee from something that they could
not see, something they could barely hear, and many times rush to
their own destruction. And there would be no sweet sound of music
then, only mocking laughter. _Panic_ was the name given to this
fear--the name by which it still is known. And, to this day, panic
yet comes, and not only by night, but only in very lonely places.
There are those who have known it, and for shame have scarce dared to
own it, in highland glens, in the loneliness of an island in the
western sea, in a green valley amongst the "solemn, kindly,
round-backed hills" of the Scottish Border, in the remoteness of the
Australian bush. They have no reasons to give--or their reasons are
far-fetched. Only, to them as to Mowgli, _Fear_ came, and the fear
seemed to them to come from a malignant something from which they must
make all haste to flee, did they value safety of mind and of body. Was
it for this reason that the Roman legionaries on the Great Wall so
often reared altars in that lonely land of moor and mountain where so
many of them fought and died--

    "_To Pan, and to the Sylvan deities_"?

For surely Pan was there, where the curlew cried and the pewit
mourned, and sometimes the waiting soldiers must almost have imagined
his mocking laughter borne in the winds that swept across the bleak
hills of their exiled solitude.

He who was surely one of the bravest of mankind, one who always, in
his own words, "clung to his paddle," writes of such a fear when he
escaped death by drowning from the Oise in flood.

"The devouring element in the universe had leaped out against me, in
this green valley quickened by a running stream. The bells were all
very pretty in their way, but I had heard some of the hollow notes of
Pan's music. Would the wicked river drag me down by the heels,
indeed? and look so beautiful all the time? Nature's good humour was
only skin-deep, after all."

And of the reeds he writes: "Pan once played upon their forefathers;
and so, by the hands of his river, he still plays upon these later
generations down all the valley of the Oise; and plays the same air,
both sweet and shrill, to tell us of the beauty and the terror of the
world."

"_The Beauty and the terror of the world_"--was not this what Pan
stood for to the Greeks of long ago?

The gladness of living, the terror of living--the exquisite joy and
the infinite pain--that has been the possession of Pan--for we have
not yet found a more fitting title--since ever time began. And because
Pan is as he is, from him has evolved a higher Pantheism. We have done
away with his goat's feet and his horns, although these were handed on
from him to Satan when Christianity broke down the altars of Paganism.

"Nature, which is the Time-vesture of God and reveals Him to the wise,
hides Him from the foolish," writes Carlyle. Pan is Nature, and Nature
is not the ugly thing that the Calvinists would once have had us
believe it to be. Nature is capable of being made the garment of God.

    "In Being's floods, in Action's storm,
    I walk and work, above, beneath,
    Work and weave in endless motion!
            Birth and Death,
            An infinite ocean;
            A seizing and giving
            The fire of Living;
    'Tis thus at the roaring loom of Time I ply,
    And weave for God the Garment thou seest Him by."

So speaks the _Erdgeist_ in Goethe's _Faust_, and yet another of the
greatest of the poets writes:

    "The sun, the moon, the stars, the seas, the hills and the plains--
    Are not these, O Soul, the Vision of Him who reigns?

               *   *   *   *   *

    And the ear of man cannot hear, and the eye of man cannot see;
    But if we could see and hear, this Vision--were it not He?"

        Tennyson.

Carlyle says that "The whole universe is the Garment of God," and he
who lives very close to Nature must, at least once in a lifetime,
come, in the solitude of the lonely mountain tops, upon that bush that
burns and is not yet consumed, and out of the midst of which speaks
the voice of the Eternal.

The immortal soul--the human body--united, yet ever in conflict--that
is Pan. The sighing and longing for things that must endure
everlastingly--the riotous enjoyment of the beauty of life--the
perfect appreciation of the things that are. Life is so real, so
strong, so full of joyousness and of beauty,--and on the other side of
a dark stream, cold, menacing, cruel, stands Death. Yet Life and Death
make up the sum of existence, and until we, who live our paltry little
lives here on earth in the hope of a Beyond, can realise what is the
true air that is played on those pipes of Pan, there is no hope for us
of even a vague comprehension of the illimitable Immortality.

It is a very old tale that tells us of the passing of Pan. In the
reign of Tiberius, on that day when, on the hill of Calvary, at
Jerusalem in Syria, Jesus Christ died as a malefactor, on the
cross--"And it was about the sixth hour, and there was a darkness all
over the earth"--Thamus, an Egyptian pilot, was guiding a ship near
the islands of Pax√¶ in the Ionian Sea; and to him came a great voice,
saying, "Go! make everywhere the proclamation, _Great Pan is dead!_"

And from the poop of his ship, when, in great heaviness of heart,
because for him the joy of the world seemed to have passed away,
Thamus had reached Palodes, he shouted aloud the words that he had
been told. Then, from all the earth there arose a sound of great
lamentation, and the sea and the trees, the hills, and all the
creatures of Pan sighed in sobbing unison an echo of the pilot's
words--"_Pan is dead--Pan is dead._"

    "The lonely mountains o'er
    And the resounding shore,
    A voice of weeping heard, and loud lament;
    From haunted spring and dale
    Edg'd with poplar pale,
    The parting genius is with sighing sent;
    With flow'r-inwoven tresses torn,
    The Nymphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn."

        Milton.

Pan was dead, and the gods died with him.

    "Gods of Hellas, gods of Hellas,
    Can ye listen in your silence?
    Can your mystic voices tell us
    Where ye hide? In floating islands,
    With a wind that evermore
    Keeps you out of sight of shore?
          Pan, Pan is dead.

               *   *   *   *   *

    Gods! we vainly do adjure you,--
    Ye return nor voice nor sign!
    Not a votary could secure you
    Even a grave for your Divine!
    Not a grave to show thereby,
    '_Here these grey old gods do lie,_'
          Pan, Pan is dead."

        E. B. Browning.

Pan is dead. In the old Hellenistic sense Pan is gone forever. Yet
until Nature has ceased to be, the thing we call Pan must remain a
living entity. Some there be who call his music, when he makes all
humanity dance to his piping, "_Joie de vivre_," and De Musset speaks
of "_Le vin de la jeunesse_" which ferments "_dans les veines de
Dieu_." It is Pan who inspires Seumas, the old islander, of whom Fiona
Macleod writes, and who, looking towards the sea at sunrise, says,
"Every morning like this I take my hat off to the beauty of the
world."

Half of the flesh and half of the spirit is Pan. There are some who
have never come into contact with him, who know him only as the emblem
of Paganism, a cruel thing, more beast than man, trampling, with
goat's feet, on the gentlest flowers of spring. They know not the
meaning of "the Green Fire of Life," nor have they ever known Pan's
moods of tender sadness. Never to them has come in the forest, where
the great grey trunks of the beeches rise from a carpet of primroses
and blue hyacinths, and the slender silver beeches are the guardian
angels of the starry wood-anemones, and the sunbeams slant through the
oak and beech leaves of tender green and play on the dead amber leaves
of a year that is gone, the whisper of little feet that cannot be
seen, the piercing sweet music from very far away, that fills the
heart with gladness and yet with a strange pain--the ache of the
_Weltschmerz_--the echo of the pipes of Pan.

    "... Oftenest in the dark woods I hear him sing
    Dim, half-remembered things, where the old mosses cling
    To the old trees, and the faint wandering eddies bring
    The phantom echoes of a phantom spring."

        Fiona Macleod.




LORELEI

    "Ich weiss nicht, was soll es bedeuten,
    Dass ich so traurig bin;
    Ein M√§rchen aus alten Zeiten,
    Das kommt mir nicht aus dem Sinn.

               *   *   *   *   *

    Die sch√∂nste Jungfrau sitzet
    Dort oben wunderbar,
    Ihr gold'nes Geschmeide blitzet,
    Sie k√§mmt ihr gold'nes Haar.

    Sie k√§mmt es mit gold'nem Kamme,
    Und singt ein Lied dabei;
    Das hat eine wundersame,
    Gewaltige Melodei."

        Heine.


In every land, North and South, East and West, from sea to sea, myth
and legend hand down to us as cruel and malignant creatures, who
ceaselessly seek to slay man's body and to destroy his soul, the
half-human children of the restless sea and of the fiercely running
streams.

In Scotland and in Australia, in every part of Europe, we have tales
of horrible formless things which frequent lonely rivers and lochs and
marshes, and to meet which must mean Death. And equal in malignity
with them, and infinitely more dangerous, are the beautiful beings who
would seem to claim descent from Lilith, the soulless wife of Adam.

Such were the sirens who would have compassed the destruction of
Odysseus. Such are the mermaids, to wed with one of whom must bring
unutterable woe upon any of the sons of men. In lonely far-off places
by the sea there still are tales of exquisite melodies heard in the
gloaming, or at night when the moon makes a silver pathway across the
water; still are there stories of women whose home is in the depths of
the ocean, and who come to charm away men's souls by their beauty and
by their pitiful longing for human love.

Those who have looked on the yellow-green waters of the Seine, or who
have seen the more turbid, more powerful Thames sweeping her serious,
majestic way down towards the open ocean, at Westminster, or at London
Bridge, can perhaps realise something of that inwardness of things
that made the people of the past, and that makes the mentally
uncontrolled people of the present, feel a fateful power calling upon
them to listen to the insistence of the exacting waters, and to
surrender their lives and their souls forever to a thing that called
and which would brook no denial. In the Morgue, or in a mortuary by
the river-side, their poor bodies have lain when the rivers have
worked their will with them, and "Suicide," "Death by drowning," or
"By Misadventure" have been the verdicts given. We live in a too
practical, too utterly common-sensical age to conceive a poor woman
with nothing on earth left to live for, being lured down to the Shades
by a creature of the water, or a man who longs for death seeing a
beautiful daughter of a river-god beckoning to him to come where he
will find peace everlasting.

Yet ever we war with the sea. All of us know her seductive charm, but
all of us fear her. The boundary line between our fear of the fierce,
remorseless, ever-seeking, cruel waves that lap up life swiftly as a
thirsty beast laps water, and the old belief in cruel sea-creatures
that sought constantly for the human things that were to be their
prey, is a very narrow one. And once we have seen the sea in a rage,
flinging herself in terrible anger against the poor, frail toy that
the hands of men have made and that was intended to rule and to resist
her, foaming and frothing over the decks of the thing that carries
human lives, we can understand much of the old pagan belief. If one
has watched a river in spate, red as with blood, rushing triumphantly
over all resistance, smashing down the trees that baulk it, sweeping
away each poor, helpless thing, brute or human, that it encounters,
dealing out ruin and death, and proceeding superbly on to carry its
trophies of disaster to the bosom of the Ocean Mother, very easy is it
to see from whence came those old tales of cruelty, of irresistible
strength, of desire.

Many are the tales of sea-maidens who have stolen men's lives from
them and sent their bodies to move up and down amidst the wrack, like
broken toys with which a child has grown tired of playing and cast
away in weariness. In an eighth-century chronicle concerning St.
Fechin, we read of evil powers whose rage is "seen in that watery fury
and their hellish hate and turbulence in the beating of the sea
against the rocks." "The bitter gifts of our lord Poseidon" is the
name given to them by one of the earliest poets of Greece[7] and a
poet of our own time--poet of the sea, of running water, and of lonely
places--quotes from the saying of a fisherman of the isle of Ulva
words that show why simple minds have so many times materialised the
restless, devouring element into the form of a woman who is very
beautiful, but whose tender mercies are very cruel. "She is like a
woman of the old tales whose beauty is dreadful," said Seumas, the
islander, "and who breaks your heart at last whether she smiles or
frowns. But she doesn't care about that, or whether you are hurt or
not. It's because she has no heart, being all a wild water."[8]

Treacherous, beautiful, remorseless, that is how men regard the sea
and the rushing rivers, of whom the sirens and mermaids of old
tradition have come to stand as symbols. Treacherous and pitiless, yet
with a fascination that can draw even the moon and the stars to her
breast:

    "Once I sat upon a promontory,
    And heard a mermaid, on a dolphin's back,
    Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath,
    That the rude sea grew civil at her song;
    And certain stars shot madly from their spheres,
    To hear the sea-maid's music."

        Shakespeare.

Very many are the stories of the women of the sea and of the rivers,
but that one who must forever hold her own, because Heine has
immortalised her in song, is the river maiden of the Rhine--the
Lorelei.

Near St. Goar, there rises out of the waters of the Rhine a
perpendicular rock, some four hundred feet high. Many a boatman in
bygone days there met his death, and the echo which it possesses is
still a mournful one. Those who know the great river, under which lies
hid the treasure of the Nibelungs, with its "gleaming towns by the
river-side and the green vineyards combed along the hills," and who
have felt the romance of the rugged crags, crowned by ruined castles,
that stand like fantastic and very ancient sentries to guard its
channel, can well understand how easy of belief was the legend of the
Lorelei.

Down the green waters came the boatman's frail craft, ever drawing
nearer to the perilous rock. All his care and all his skill were
required to avert a very visible danger. But high above him, from the
rock round which the swirling eddies splashed and foamed, there came a
voice.

    "Her voice was like the voice the stars
    Had when they sang together."

And when the boatman looked up at the sound of such sweet music, he
beheld a maiden more fair than any he had ever dreamed of. On the rock
she sat, combing her long golden hair with a comb of red gold. Her
limbs were white as foam and her eyes green like the emerald green of
the rushing river. And her red lips smiled on him and her arms were
held out to him in welcome, and the sound of her song thrilled through
the heart of him who listened, and her eyes drew his soul to her arms.

Forgotten was all peril. The rushing stream seized the little boat
and did with it as it willed. And while the boatman still gazed
upwards, intoxicated by her matchless beauty and the magic of her
voice, his boat was swept against the rock, and, with the jar and
crash, knowledge came back to him, and he heard, with broken heart,
the mocking laughter of the Lorelei as he was dragged down as if by a
thousand icy hands, and, with a choking sigh, surrendered his life to
the pitiless river.

To one man only was it granted to see the siren so near that he could
hold her little, cold, white hands, and feel the wondrous golden hair
sweep across his eyes. This was a young fisherman, who met her by the
river and listened to the entrancing songs that she sang for him
alone. Each evening she would tell him where to cast his nets on the
morrow, and he prospered greatly and was a marvel to all others who
fished in the waters of the Rhine. But there came an evening when he
was seen joyously hastening down the river bank in response to the
voice of the Lorelei, that surely never had sounded so honey-sweet
before, and he came back nevermore. They said that the Lorelei had
dragged him down to her coral caves that he might live with her there
forever, and, if it were not so, the rushing water could never whisper
her secret and theirs, of a lifeless plaything that they swept
seawards, and that wore a look of horror and of great wonder in its
dead, wide-open eyes.

It is "ein M√§rchen aus alten Zeiten"--a legend of long ago.

But it is a very much older _M√§rchen_ that tells us of the warning of
Circe to Odysseus:

"To the Sirens first shalt thou come, who bewitch all men, whosoever
shall come to them. Whoso draws nigh them unwittingly and hears the
sound of the Siren's voice, never doth he see wife or babes stand by
him on his return, nor have they joy at his coming; but the Sirens
enchant him with their clear song."

And until there shall be no more sea and the rivers have ceased to
run, the enchantment that comes from the call of the water to the
hearts of men must go on. Day by day the toll of lives is paid, and
still the cruel daughters of the deep remain unsatisfied. We can hear
their hungry whimper from the rushing river through the night, and the
waves of the sea that thunders along the coast would seem to voice the
insistence of their desire. And we who listen to their ceaseless,
restless moan can say with Heine:

    "_Ich weiss nicht, was soll es bedeuten,_
    _Dass ich so traurig bin._"

For the sadness of heart, the melancholy that their music brings us is
a mystery which none on this earth may ever unravel.


FOOTNOTES:

[7] Archilochus of Paros.

[8] Fiona Macleod (_The Winged Destiny_).




FREYA, QUEEN OF THE NORTHERN GODS


"Friday's bairn is loving and giving," says the old rhyme that sets
forth the special qualities of the children born on each day of the
week, and to the superstitious who regard Friday as a day of evil
omen, it seems strange that Friday's bairn should be so blessed. But
they forget that before Christianity swept paganism before it, and
taught those who worshipped the northern gods the story of that first
black "Good Friday," the tragedy in which all humanity was involved,
Friday was the day of Freya, "The Beloved," gentle protectress, and
most generous giver of all joys, delights, and pleasures. From her, in
medi√¶val times, the high-born women who acted as dispensers to their
lords first took the title _Frouwa_ (=Frau), and when, in its
transition stage, the old heathenism had evolved into a religion of
strong nature worship, overshadowed by fatalism, only thinly veneered
by Christianity, the minds of the Christian converts of Scandinavia,
like those of puzzled children, transferred to the Virgin Mary the
attributes that had formerly been those of their "Lady"--Freya, the
goddess of Love.

Long before the Madonna was worshipped, Freya gave her name to plants,
to flowers, and even to insects, and the child who says to the
beautiful little insect, that he finds on a leaf, "Ladybird, ladybird,
fly away home," is commemorating the name of the Lady, Freya, to whom
his ancestors offered their prayers.

In her home in the Hall of Mists, Freya (or Frigga), wife of Odin the
All Father, sat with her golden distaff spinning the clouds. Orion's
Belt was known as "Frigga's spindle" by the Norsemen, and the men on
the earth, as they watched the great cumulous masses of snowy-white,
golden or silver edged, the fleecy cloudlets of grey, soft as the
feathers on the breast of a dove, or the angry banks of black and
purple, portending a storm, had constant proof of the diligence of
their goddess. She was the protectress of those who sailed the seas,
and the care of children as they came into the world was also hers.
Hers, too, was the happy task of bringing together after death, lovers
whom Death had parted, and to her belonged the glorious task of going
down to the fields of battle where the slain lay strewn like leaves in
autumn and leading to Valhalla the half of the warriors who, as
heroes, had died. Her vision enabled her to look over all the earth,
and she could see into the Future, but she held her knowledge as a
profound secret that none could prevail upon her to betray.

    "Of me the gods are sprung;
    And all that is to come I know, but lock
    In my own breast, and have to none reveal'd."

        Matthew Arnold.

[Illustration: FREYA SAT SPINNING THE CLOUDS]

Thus she came to be pictured crowned with heron plumes, the symbol of
silence--the silence of the lonely marshes where the heron stands in
mutest contemplation--a tall, very stately, very queenly, wholly
beautiful woman, with a bunch of keys at her girdle--symbol of her
protection of the Northern housewife--sometimes clad in snow-white
robes, sometimes in robes of sombre black. And because her care was
for the anxious, weary housewife, for the mother and her new-born
babe, for the storm-tossed mariner, fighting the billows of a hungry
sea, for those whose true and pure love had suffered the crucifixion
of death, and for the glorious dead on the field of battle, it is very
easy to see Freya as her worshippers saw her--an ideal of perfect
womanhood.

But the gods of the Norsemen were never wholly gods. Always they, like
the gods of Greece, endeared themselves to humanity by possessing some
little, or big, human weakness. And Freya is none the less lovable to
the descendants of her worshippers because she possessed the so-called
"feminine weakness" of love of dress. Jewels, too, she loved, and
knowing the wondrous skill of the dwarfs in fashioning exquisite
ornaments, she broke off a piece of gold from the statue of Odin, her
husband, and gave it to them to make into a necklace--the marvellous
jewelled necklace Brisingamen, that in time to come was possessed by
Beowulf. It was so exquisite a thing that it made her beauty twice
more perfect, and Odin loved her doubly much because of it. But when
he discovered that his statue had been tampered with, his wrath was
very great, and furiously he summoned the dwarfs--they who dealt
always with fine metal--and demanded of them which of them had done
him this grievous wrong. But the dwarfs loved Freya, and from them he
got no answer.

Then he placed the statue above the temple gate, and laboured with
guile to devise runes that might give it the power of speech, so that
it might shout aloud the name of the impious robber as the robber went
by. Freya, no longer an omnipotent goddess, but a frightened wife,
trembled before his wrath, and begged the dwarfs to help her. And when
one of them--the most hideous of all--promised that he would prevent
the statue from speaking if Freya would but deign to smile upon him,
the queen of the gods, who had no dread of ugly things, and whose
heart was full of love and of pity, smiled her gentle smile on the
piteous little creature who had never known looks of anything but
horror and disgust from any of the deathless gods. It was for him a
wondrous moment, and the payment was worth Death itself. That night a
deep sleep fell on the guards of Odin's statue, and, while they slept,
the statue was pulled down from its pedestal and smashed into pieces.
The dwarf had fulfilled his part of the bargain.

When Odin next morning discovered the sacrilege, great was his anger,
and when no inquiry could find for him the criminal, he quitted Asgard
in furious wrath. For seven months he stayed away, and in that time
the Ice Giants invaded his realm, and all the land was covered with a
pall of snow, viciously pinched by black frosts, chilled by clinging,
deadening, impenetrable mists. But at the end of seven dreary months
Odin returned, and with him came the blessings of light and of
sunshine, and the Ice Giants in terror fled away.

Well was it for woman or for warrior to gain the favour of Freya, the
Beloved, who knew how to rule even Odin, the All Father, himself. The
Winilers who were warring with the Vandals once sought her aid, and
gained her promise of help. From Hlidskialf, the mighty watch-tower,
highest point in Asgard, from whence Odin and his queen could look
down and behold what was happening all the world over, amongst gods
and men, dwarfs, elves, and giants, and all creatures of their
kingdom, Freya watched the Vandals and the Winilers making ready for
the battle which was to decide forever which people should rule the
other.

Night was descending, but in the evening light the two gods beheld the
glitter of spears, the gleam of brass helmets and of swords, and heard
from afar the hoarse shouts of the warriors as they made ready for the
great fight on the morrow. Knowing well that her lord favoured the
Vandals, Freya asked him to tell her which army was to gain the
victory. "The army upon which my eyes shall first rest when I awake at
the dawning," said Odin, full well knowing that his couch was so
placed that he could not fail to see the Vandals when he woke. Well
pleased with his own astuteness, he then retired to rest, and soon
sleep lay heavy on his eyelids. But, while he slept, Freya gently
moved the couch upon which he lay, so that he must open his eyes not
on the army who had won his favour, but on the army that owned hers.
To the Winilers, she gave command to dress up their women as men, and
let them meet the gaze of Odin in the dawning, in full battle array.

    "Take thou thy women-folk,
    Maidens and wives;
    Over your ankles
    Lace on the white war-hose;
    Over your bosoms
    Link up the hard mail-nets;
    Over your lips
    Plait long tresses with cunning;--
    So war beasts full-bearded
    King Odin shall deem you,
    When off the grey sea-beach
    At sunrise ye greet him."

        Charles Kingsley.

When the sun sent its first pale green light next morning over grey
sky and sea, Odin awoke, and gazed from his watch-tower at the army on
the beach. And, with great amazement, "What Longbeards are those?" he
cried.

"They are Winilers!" said Freya, in joyous triumph, "but you have
given them a new name. Now must you also give them a gift! Let it be
the victory, I pray you, dear lord of mine."

And Odin, seeing himself outwitted and knowing that honour bade him
follow the Northern custom and give the people he had named a gift,
bestowed on the Longbeards and their men the victory that Freya
craved. Nor was the gift of Odin one for that day alone, for to him
the _Langobarden_ attributed the many victories that led them at last
to find a home in the sunny land of Italy, where beautiful Lombardy
still commemorates by its name the stratagem of Freya, the queen.

With the coming of Christianity, Freya, the Beloved, was cast out
along with all the other old forgotten gods. The people who had loved
and worshipped her were taught that she was an evil thing and that to
worship her was sin. Thus she was banished to the lonely peaks of the
mountains of Norway and of Sweden and to the Brocken in Germany, no
longer a goddess to be loved, but transformed into a malignant power,
full of horror and of wickedness. On Walpurgis Night she led the
witches' revels on the Brocken, and the cats who were said to draw her
car while still she was regarded as a beneficent protectress of the
weak and needy, ceased to be the gentle creatures of Freya the Good,
and came under the ban of religion as the satanic companions of
witches by habit and repute.

One gentle thing only was her memory allowed to keep. When, not as an
omnipotent goddess but as a heart-broken mother, she wept the death of
her dearly-loved son, Baldur the Beautiful, the tears that she shed
were turned, as they fell, into pure gold that is found in the beds of
lonely mountain streams. And we who claim descent from the peoples who
worshipped her--

    "Saxon and Norman and Dane are we"--

can surely cleanse her memory from all the ugly impurities of
superstition and remember only the pure gold of the fact that our
warrior ancestors did not only pray to a fierce and mighty god of
battles, but to a woman who was "loving and giving"--the little
child's deification of the mother whom it loves and who holds it very
dear.




THE DEATH OF BALDUR

    "I heard a voice, that cried,
    'Baldur the Beautiful
    Is dead, is dead!'
    And through the misty air
    Passed like the mournful cry
    Of sunward sailing cranes."

        Longfellow.


Among the gods of Greece we find gods and goddesses who do unworthy
deeds, but none to act the permanent part of villain of the play. In
the mythology of the Norsemen we have a god who is wholly treacherous
and evil, ever the villain of the piece, cunning, malicious,
vindictive, and cruel--the god Loki. And as his foil, and his victim,
we have Baldur, best of all gods, most beautiful, most greatly
beloved. Baldur was the Galahad of the court of Odin the king, his
father.

    "My strength is of the strength of ten,
    Because my heart is pure."

No impure thing was to be found in his dwelling; none could impugn his
courage, yet ever he counselled peace, ever was gentle and infinitely
wise, and his beauty was as the beauty of the whitest of all the
flowers of the Northland, called after him _Baldrsbr√°_. The god of the
Norsemen was essentially a god of battles, and we are told by great
authorities that Baldur was originally a hero who fought on the
earth, and who, in time, came to be deified. Even if it be so, it is
good to think that a race of warriors could worship one whose chief
qualities were wisdom, purity, and love.

In perfect happiness, loving and beloved, Baldur lived in Asgard with
his wife Nanna, until a night when his sleep was assailed by horrible
dreams of evil omen. In the morning he told the gods that he had
dreamed that Death, a thing till then unknown in Asgard, had come and
cruelly taken his life away. Solemnly the gods debated how this ill
happening might be averted, and Freya, his mother, fear for her best
beloved hanging heavy over her heart, took upon herself the task of
laying under oath fire and water, iron and all other metals, trees and
shrubs, birds, beasts and creeping things, to do no harm to Baldur.
With eager haste she went from place to place, nor did she fail to
exact the oath from anything in all nature, animate or inanimate, save
one only.

"A twig of mistletoe, tender and fair, grew high above the field," and
such a little thing it was, with its dainty green leaves and waxen
white berries, nestling for protection under the strong arm of a great
oak, that the goddess passed it by. Assuredly no scathe could come to
Baldur the Beautiful from a creature so insignificant, and Freya
returned to Asgard well pleased with her quest.

Then indeed was there joy and laughter amongst the gods, for each one
tried how he might slay Baldur, but neither sword nor stone, hammer
nor battle-axe could work him any ill.

Odin alone remained unsatisfied. Mounted on his eight-footed grey
steed, Sleipnir, he galloped off in haste to consult the giant
prophetess Angrbotha, who was dead and had to be followed to Niflheim,
the chilly underworld that lies far north from the world of men, and
where the sun never comes. Hel, the daughter of Loki and of Angrbotha,
was queen of this dark domain.

    "There, in a bitterly cold place, she received the souls
    of all who died of sickness or old age; care was her
    bed, hunger her dish, starvation her knife. Her walls
    were high and strong, and her bolts and bars huge; 'Half
    blue was her skin, and half the colour of human flesh. A
    goddess easy to know, and in all things very stern and
    grim.'"

        Dasent.

In her kingdom no soul that passed away in glorious battle was
received, nor any that fought out the last of life in a fierce combat
with the angry waves of the sea. Only those who died ingloriously were
her guests.

When he had reached the realm of Hel, Odin found that a feast was
being prepared, and the couches were spread, as for an honoured guest,
with rich tapestry and with gold. For many a year had Angrbotha rested
there in peace, and it was only by chanting a magic spell and tracing
those runes which have power to raise the dead that Odin awoke her.
When she raised herself, terrible and angry from her tomb, he did not
tell her that he was the mighty father of gods and men. He only asked
her for whom the great feast was prepared, and why Hel was spreading
her couches so gorgeously. And to the father of Baldur she revealed
the secret of the future, that Baldur was the expected guest, and that
by his blind brother Hodur his soul was to be hastened to the Shades.

"Who, then, would avenge him?" asked the father, great wrath in his
heart. And the prophetess replied that his death should be avenged by
Vali, his youngest brother, who should not wash his hands nor comb his
hair until he had brought the slayer of Baldur to the funeral pyre.
But yet another question Odin would fain have answered.

"_Who_," he asked, "_would refuse to weep at Baldur's death?_"

Thereat the prophetess, knowing that her questioner could be none
other than Odin, for to no mortal man could be known so much of the
future, refused for evermore to speak, and returned to the silence of
her tomb. And Odin was forced to mount his steed and to return to his
own land of warmth and pleasure.

On his return he found that all was well with Baldur. Thus he tried to
still his anxious heart and to forget the feast in the chill regions
of Niflheim, spread for the son who was to him the dearest, and to
laugh with those who tried in vain to bring scathe to Baldur.

Only one among those who looked at those sports and grew merry, as he
whom they loved stood like a great cliff against which the devouring
waves of the fierce North Sea beat and foam and crash in vain, had
malice in his heart as he beheld the wonder. In the evil heart of Loki
there came a desire to overthrow the god who was beloved by all gods
and by all men. He hated him because he was pure, and the mind of Loki
was as a stream into which all the filth of the world is discharged.
He hated him because Baldur was truth and loyalty, and he, Loki, was
treachery and dishonour. He hated him because to Loki there came never
a thought that was not full of meanness and greed and cruelty and
vice, and Baldur was indeed one _sans peur et sans reproche_.

Thus Loki, taking upon himself the form of a woman, went to Fensalir,
the palace, all silver and gold, where dwelt Freya, the mother of
Baldur.

The goddess sat, in happy majesty, spinning the clouds, and when Loki,
apparently a gentle old woman, passed by where she sat, and then
paused and asked, as if amazed, what were the shouts of merriment that
she heard, the smiling goddess replied:

"All things on earth have sworn to me never to injure Baldur, and all
the gods use their weapons against him in vain. Baldur is safe for
evermore."

"All things?" queried Loki.

And Freya answered, "All things but the mistletoe. No harm can come to
him from a thing so weak that it only lives by the lives of others."

Then the vicious heart of Loki grew joyous. Quickly he went to where
the mistletoe grew, cut a slender green branch, shaped it into a
point, and sought the blind god Hodur.

Hodur stood aside, while the other gods merrily pursued their sport.

"Why dost thou not take aim at Baldur with a weapon that fails and so
join in the laughter?" asked Loki.

And Hodur sadly made answer:

"Well dost thou know that darkness is my lot, nor have I ought to
cast at my brother."

Then Loki placed in his hand the shaft of mistletoe and guided his
aim, and well and surely Hodur cast the dart. He waited, then, for the
merry laughter that followed ever on the onslaught of those against
him whom none could do harm. But a great and terrible cry smote his
ears. "_Baldur the Beautiful is dead! is dead!_"

On the ground lay Baldur, a white flower cut down by the scythe of the
mower. And all through the realm of the gods, and all through the land
of the Northmen there arose a cry of bitter lamentation.

"That was the greatest woe that ever befell gods and men," says the
story.

The sound of terrible mourning in place of laughter brought Freya to
where

    "on the floor lay Baldur dead; and round lay thickly
    strewn swords, axes, darts, and spears, which all the
    gods in sport had lightly thrown at Baldur, whom no
    weapon pierced or clove; but in his breast stood fixed
    the fatal bough of mistletoe."

        Matthew Arnold.

When she saw what had befallen him, Freya's grief was a grief that
refused to be comforted, but when the gods, overwhelmed with sorrow,
knew not what course to take, she quickly commanded that one should
ride to Niflheim and offer Hel a ransom if she would permit Baldur to
return to Asgard.

Hermoder the Nimble, another of the sons of Odin, undertook the
mission, and, mounted on his father's eight-footed steed, he speedily
reached the ice-cold domain of Hel.

There he found Baldur, sitting on the noblest seat of those who
feasted, ruling among the people of the Underworld. With burning words
Hermoder pled with Hel that she would permit Baldur to return to the
world of gods and the world of men, by both of whom he was so dearly
beloved. Said Hel:

    "Come then! if Baldur was so dear beloved,
    And this is true, and such a loss is Heaven's--
    Hear, how to Heaven may Baldur be restored.
    Show me through all the world the signs of grief!
    Fails but one thing to grieve, here Baldur stops!
    Let all that lives and moves upon the earth
    Weep him, and all that is without life weep;
    Let Gods, men, brutes, beweep him; plants and stones,
    So shall I know the loss was dear indeed,
    And bend my heart, and give him back to Heaven."

        Matthew Arnold.

Gladly Hermoder made answer:

"All things shall weep for Baldur!"

Swiftly he made his perilous return journey, and at once, when the
gods heard what Hel had said, messengers were despatched all over the
earth to beg all things, living and dead, to weep for Baldur, and so
dear to all nature was the beautiful god, that the messengers
everywhere left behind them a track of the tears that they caused to
be shed.

Meantime, in Asgard, preparations were made for Baldur's pyre. The
longest of the pines in the forest were cut down by the gods, and
piled up in a mighty pyre on the deck of his great ship _Ringhorn_,
the largest in the world.

[Illustration: "BALDUR THE BEAUTIFUL IS DEAD"]

    "Seventy ells and four extended
    On the grass the vessel's keel;
    High above it, gilt and splendid,
    Rose the figure-head ferocious
    With its crest of steel."

        Longfellow.

Down to the seashore they bore the body, and laid it on the pyre with
rich gifts all round it, and the pine trunks of the Northern forests
that formed the pyre, they covered with gorgeous tapestries and
fragrant flowers. And when they had laid him there, with all love and
gentleness, and his fair young wife, Nanna, looked on his beautiful
still face, sorrow smote her heart so that it was broken, and she fell
down dead. Tenderly they laid her beside him, and by him, too, they
laid the bodies of his horse and his hounds, which they slew to bear
their master company in the land whither his soul had fled; and around
the pyre they twined thorns, the emblem of sleep.

Yet even then they looked for his speedy return, radiant and glad to
come home to a sunlit land of happiness. And when the messengers who
were to have brought tidings of his freedom were seen drawing near,
eagerly they crowded to hear the glad words, "_All creatures weep, and
Baldur shall return!_"

But with them they brought not hope, but despair. All things, living
and dead, had wept, save one only. A giantess who sat in a dark cave
had laughed them to scorn. With devilish merriment she mocked:

    "Neither in life, nor yet in death,
    Gave he me gladness.
    Let Hel keep her prey."

Then all knew that yet a second time had Baldur been betrayed, and
that the giantess was none other than Loki, and Loki, realising the
fierce wrath of Odin and of the other gods, fled before them, yet
could not escape his doom. And grief unspeakable was that of gods and
of men when they knew that in the chill realm of the inglorious dead
Baldur must remain until the twilight of the gods had come, until old
things had passed away, and all things had become new.

Not only the gods, but the giants of the storm and frost, and the
frost elves came to behold the last of him whom they loved. Then the
pyre was set alight, and the great vessel was launched, and glided out
to sea with its sails of flame.

    "They launched the burning ship!
    It floated far away
    Over the misty sea,
    Till like the sun it seemed,
    Sinking beneath the waves,
    Baldur returned no more!"

Yet, ere he parted from his dead son, Odin stooped over him and
whispered a word in his ear. And there are those who say that as the
gods in infinite sorrow stood on the beach staring out to sea,
darkness fell, and only a fiery track on the waves showed whither he
had gone whose passing had robbed Asgard and the Earth of their most
beautiful thing, heavy as the weight of chill Death's remorseless hand
would have been their hearts, but for the knowledge of that word. They
knew that with the death of Baldur the twilight of the gods had begun,
and that by much strife and infinite suffering down through the ages
the work of their purification and hallowing must be wrought. But when
all were fit to receive him, and peace and happiness reigned again on
earth and in heaven, Baldur would come back. For the word was
_Resurrection_.

    "So perish the old Gods!
    But out of the sea of time
    Rises a new land of song,
    Fairer than the old."

        Longfellow.

    "Heartily know,
    When half-gods go,
    The gods arrive."

        Emerson.




BEOWULF

    "He was of mankind
    In might the strongest."

        Longfellow's Translation.


Whether those who read it be scholars who would argue about the origin
and date of the poem, ingenious theorists who would fain use all the
fragmentary tales and rhymes of the nursery as parts of a vast jig-saw
puzzle of nature myths, or merely simple folk who read a tale for a
tale's sake, every reader of the poem of Beowulf must own that it is
one of the finest stories ever written.

It is "the most ancient heroic poem in the Germanic language," and was
brought to Britain by the "Wing√®d Hats" who sailed across the grey
North Sea to conquer and to help to weld that great amalgam of peoples
into what is now the British Race.

But once it had arrived in England, the legend was put into a dress
that the British-born could more readily appreciate. In all
probability the scene of the story was a corner of that island of
Saeland upon which Copenhagen now stands, but he who wrote down the
poem for his countrymen and who wrote it in the pure literary
Anglo-Saxon of Wessex, painted the scenery from the places that he and
his readers knew best. And if you should walk along the breezy,
magnificent, rugged Yorkshire coast for twelve miles, from Whitby
northward to the top of Bowlby Cliff, you would find it quite easy to
believe that it was there amongst the high sea-cliffs that Beowulf
and his hearth-sharers once lived, and there, on the highest ness of
our eastern coast, under a great barrow, that Beowulf was buried.
_Beowulfesby_--_Bowlby_ seems a quite easy transition. But the people
of our island race have undoubtedly a gift for seizing the imports of
other lands and hall-marking them as their own, and, in all
probability, the Beowulf of the heroic poem was one who lived and died
in the land of Scandinavia.

In Denmark, so goes the story, when the people were longing for a
king, to their shores there drifted, on a day when the white birds
were screaming over the sea-tangle and wreckage that a stormy sea, now
sinking to rest, was sweeping up on the shore, a little boat in which,
on a sheaf of ripe wheat and surrounded by priceless weapons and
jewels, there lay a most beautiful babe, who smiled in his sleep. That
he was the son of Odin they had no doubt, and they made him their
king, and served him faithfully and loyally for the rest of his life.

A worthy and a noble king was King Scyld Scefing, a ruler on land and
on the sea, of which even as an infant he had had no fear. But when
many years had come and gone, and when Scyld Scefing felt that death
drew near, he called his nobles to him and told them in what manner he
fain would pass. So they did as he said, and in a ship they built a
funeral pyre, and round it placed much gold and jewels, and on it laid
a sheaf of wheat. Then with very great pain and labour, for he was old
and Death's hand lay heavy upon him, the king climbed into the ship
and stretched out his limbs on the pyre, and said farewell to all his
faithful people. And the ship drifted out with the tide, and the
hearts of the watchers were heavy as they saw the sails of the vessel
that bore him vanish into the grey, and knew that their king had gone
back to the place from whence he came, and that they should look on
his face no more.

Behind him Scyld left descendants, and one after the other reigned
over Denmark. It was in the reign of his great-grandson, Hrothgar,
that there took place those things that are told in the story of
Beowulf.

A mighty king and warrior was Hrothgar, and far across the northern
seas his fame spread wide, so that all the warriors of the land that
he ruled were proud to serve under him in peace, and in war to die for
him. During his long life he and his men never went forth in their
black-prowed ships without returning with the joyous shouts of the
victor, with for cargo the rich spoil they had won from their enemies.
As he grew old, Hrothgar determined to raise for himself a mighty
monument to the magnificence of his reign, and so there was builded
for him a vast hall with majestic towers and lofty pinnacles--the
finest banqueting-hall that his skilled artificers could dream of. And
when at length the hall was completed, Hrothgar gave a feast to all
his thanes, and for days and for nights on end the great rafters of
Heorot--as his palace was named--echoed the shouts and laughter of the
mighty warriors, and the music of the minstrels and the songs that
they sang. A proud man was Hrothgar on the night that the banquet was
ended amidst the acclamations of his people, and a proud and happy man
he lay down to rest, while his bodyguard of mighty warriors stretched
themselves on the rush-strewn floor of the great room where they had
feasted, and deeply slumbered there.

Now, in the dark fens of that land there dwelt a monster--fierce,
noisome, and cruel, a thing that loved evil and hated all that was
joyous and good. To its ears came the ring of the laughter and the
shouts of King Hrothgar's revellers, and the sweet song of the gleemen
and the melody of harps filled it with fierce hatred. From its wallow
in the marshes, where the pestilent grey fog hung round its dwelling,
the monster, known to all men as the Grendel, came forth, to kill and
to devour. Through the dark night, across the lonely moorland, it made
its way, and the birds of the moor flew screaming in terror before it,
and the wild creatures of the desolate country over which it padded
clapped down in their coverts and trembled as it passed. It came at
length to the great hall where

    "A fair troop of warrior thanes guarding it found he;
    Heedlessly sleeping, they recked not of sorrow."

Never a thought did they give to the Grendel,--

    "A haunter of marshes, a holder of moors,
                                ... Secret
    The land he inhabits; dark, wolf-haunted ways
    Of the windy hillside, by the treacherous tarn;
    Or where, covered up in its mist, the hill stream
    Downward flows."

Soundly slept Hrothgar, nor opened eye until, in the bright light of
the morning, he was roused by terrified servants, forgetful of his
august royalty, impelled by terror, crying aloud their terrible tale.
They had come, they said, to lay on the floor of the banqueting-hall,
sweet, fresh rushes from the meadows, and to clear away all trace of
the feasting overnight. But the two-and-thirty knights who, in full
armour, had lain down to sleep were all gone, and on the floor was
the spoor of something foul and noisome, and on the walls and on the
trampled rushes were great and terrible smears of human blood.

They tracked the Grendel back to the marsh from whence he had come,
and shuddered at the sight of bestial footprints that left
blood-stains behind.

Terrible indeed was the grief of Hrothgar, but still more terrible was
his anger. He offered a royal reward to any man who would slay the
Grendel, and full gladly ten of his warriors pledged themselves to
sleep that night in the great hall and to slay the Grendel ere morning
came.

But dawn showed once more a piteous sight. Again there were only
trampled and blood-stained rushes, with the loathsome smell of unclean
flesh. Again the foul tracks of the monster were found where it had
padded softly back to its noisome fens.

There were many brave men in the kingdom of Hrothgar the Dane, and yet
again did they strive to maintain the dignity of the great hall,
Heorot, and to uphold the honour of their king. But through twelve
dismal years the Grendel took its toll of the bravest in the realm,
and to sleep in the place that Hrothgar had built as monument to his
magnificent supremacy, ever meant, for the sleeper, shameful death.
Well content was the Grendel, that grew fat and lusty amongst the grey
mists of the black marshes, unknowing that in the land of the Goths
there was growing to manhood one whose feet already should be echoing
along that path from which Death was to come.

In the realm of the Goths, Hygelac was king, and no greater hero
lived in his kingdom than Beowulf, his own sister's son. From the age
of seven Beowulf was brought up at the court of his uncle.

A great, fair, blue-eyed lad was Beowulf, lazy, and very slow to
wrath. When he had at last become a yellow-haired giant, of wondrous
good-temper, and leisurely in movement, the other young warriors of
Gothland had mocked at him as at one who was only a very huge, very
amiable child. But, like others of the same descent, Beowulf's anger,
if slow to kindle, was a terrible fire once it began to flame. A few
of those flares-up had shown the folk of his uncle's kingdom that no
mean nor evil deed might lightly be done, nor evil word spoken in the
presence of Beowulf. In battle against the Swedes, no sword had hewn
down more men than the sword of Beowulf. And when the champion swimmer
of the land of the Goths challenged the young giant Beowulf to swim a
match with him, for five whole days they swam together. A tempest
driving down from the twilight land of the ice and snow parted them
then, and he who had been champion was driven ashore and thankfully
struggled on to the beach of his own dear country once again. But the
foaming seas cast Beowulf on some jagged cliffs, and would fain have
battered his body into broken fragments against them, and as he fought
and struggled to resist their raging cruelty, mermaids and nixies and
many monsters of the deep joined forces with the waves and strove to
wrest his life from him. And while with one hand he held on to a sharp
rock, with the other he dealt with his sword stark blows on those
children of the deep who would fain have devoured him. Their bodies,
deep-gashed and dead, floated down to the coast of Gothland, and the
king and all those who looked for the corpse of Beowulf saw them,
amazed. Then at length came Beowulf himself, and with great gladness
was he welcomed, and the king, his uncle, gave him his treasured
sword, N√§geling, in token of his valour.

In the court of Hrothgar, the number of brave warriors ever grew
smaller. One man only had witnessed the terrible slaughter of one of
those black nights and yet had kept his life. He was a bard--a
scald--and from the land where he had seen such grim horror, he fled
to the land of the Goths, and there, in the court of the king, he sang
the gloomy tale of the never-ending slaughter of noble warriors by the
foul Grendel of the fens and moors.

Beowulf listened, enthralled, to his song. But those who knew him saw
his eyes gleam as the good steel blade of a sword gleams when it is
drawn for battle, and when he asked his uncle to allow him to go to
the land of the Danes and slay this filthy thing, his uncle smiled,
with no surprise, and was very well content.

So it came to pass that Beowulf, in his black-prowed ship, with
fourteen trusty followers, set sail from Gothland for the kingdom of
Hrothgar.

The warden of the Danish coast was riding his rounds one morning when
he beheld from the white cliffs a strange war-vessel making for the
shore. Skilfully the men on board her ran her through the surf, and
beached her in a little creek between the cliffs, and made her fast to
a rock by stout cables. Only for a little time the valiant warden
watched them from afar, and then, one man against fifteen, he rode
quickly down and challenged the warriors.

    "What are ye warlike men      wielding bright weapons,
    Wearing grey corselets and      boar-adorned helmets,
    Who o'er the water-paths      come with your foaming keel
    Ploughing the ocean surge?      I was appointed
    Warden of Denmark's shores;      watch hold I by the wave
    That on this Danish coast      no deadly enemy
    Leading troops over sea      should land to injure.
    None have here landed yet      more frankly coming
    Than this fair company:      and yet ye answer not
    The password of warriors,      and customs of kinsmen.
    Ne'er have mine eyes beheld      a mightier warrior,
    An earl more lordly than      is he the chief of you;
    He is no common man;      if looks belie him not,
    He is a hero bold,      worthily weaponed.
    Anon must I know of you      kindred and country,
    Lest ye of spies should go      free on our Danish soil.
    Now ye men from afar,      sailing the surging sea,
    Have heard my earnest thought:      best is a quick reply,
    That I may swiftly know      whence ye have hither come."

Then Beowulf, with fearless eyes, gazed in the face of the warden and
told him simply and unboastfully who he was, from whence he came, and
what was his errand. He had come as the nation's deliverer, to slay
the thing that

    "Cometh in dark of night,      sateth his secret hate,
    Worketh through fearsome awe,      slaughter and shame."

With joy the warden heard his noble words.

"My men shall beach your ship," he said, "and make her fast with a
barrier of oars against the greedy tide. Come with me to the king."

It was a gallant band that strode into Heorot, where sat the old
king, gloom overshadowing his soul. And fit leader for a band of
heroes was Beowulf, a giant figure in ring-mail, spear and shield
gleaming in his hand, and by his side the mighty sword, N√§geling. To
Hrothgar, as to the warden, Beowulf told the reason of his coming, and
hope began again to live in the heart of the king.

That night the warriors from the land of the Goths were feasted in the
great banqueting-hall where, for twelve unhappy years, voices had
never rung out so bravely and so merrily. The queen herself poured out
the mead with which the king and the men from Gothland pledged each
other, and with her own hand she passed the goblet to each one. When,
last of it all, it came to the guest of honour, Beowulf took the cup
of mead from the fair queen and solemnly pledged himself to save the
land from the evil thing that devoured it like a pestilence, or to die
in his endeavour.

    "Needs must I now perform knightly deeds in this hall,
    Or here must meet my doom in darksome night."

When darkness fell the feast came to an end, and all left the hall
save Beowulf and his fourteen followers. In their armour, with swords
girt on their sides, the fourteen heroes lay down to rest, but Beowulf
laid aside all his arms and gave his sword to a thane to bear away.
For, said he,

    "I have heard
    That that foul miscreant's dark and stubborn flesh
    Recks not the force of arms ...
    Hand to hand ... Beowulf will grapple with the mighty foe."

From his fastnesses in the fens, the Grendel had heard the shouts of
revelry, and as the Goths closed their eyes to sleep, knowing they
might open them again only to grapple with hideous death, yet unafraid
because of their sure belief that "What is to be goes ever as it
must," the monster roused himself. Through the dank, chill, clinging
mists he came, and his breath made the poisonous miasma of the marshes
more deadly as he padded over the shivering reeds and trembling
rushes, across the bleak moorland and the high cliffs where the fresh
tang of the grey sea was defiled by the hideous stench of a foul beast
of prey. There was fresh food for him to-night, he knew, some blood
more potent than any that for twelve years had come his bestial way.
And he hastened on with greedy eagerness, nightmare incarnate. He
found the great door of the banqueting-hall bolted and barred, but one
angry wrench set at naught the little precautionary measures of mere
men.

The dawn was breaking dim and grey and very chill when Beowulf heard
the stealthy tread without, and the quick-following crash of the bolts
and bars that gave so readily. He made no movement, but only waited.
In an instant the dawn was blotted out by a vast black shadow, and
swifter than any great bear could strike, a scaly hand had struck one
of the friends of Beowulf. In an instant the man was torn from limb to
limb, and in a wild disgust and hatred Beowulf heard the lapping of
blood, the scrunching of bones and chewing of warm flesh as the
monster ravenously devoured him. Again the loathsome hand was
stretched out to seize and to devour. But in the darkness two hands,
like hands of iron, gripped the outstretched arm, and the Grendel knew
that he had met his match at last. The warriors of Beowulf awoke to
find a struggle going on such as their eyes never before beheld, for
it was a fight to the death between man and monster. Vainly they tried
to aid their leader, but their weapons only glanced harmlessly off the
Grendel's scaly hide. Up and down the hall the combatants wrestled,
until the walls shook and the great building itself rocked to its
foundations. Ever and again it seemed as though no human power could
prevail against teeth and claws and demonic fury, and as tables and
benches crashed to the ground and broke under the tramping feet of the
Grendel, it appeared an impossible thing that Beowulf should overcome.
Yet ever tighter and more tight grew the iron grip of Beowulf. His
fingers seemed turned to iron. His hatred and loathing made his grasp
crash through scales, into flesh, and crush the marrow out of the bone
it found there. And when at length the Grendel could no more, and with
a terrible cry wrenched himself free, and fled, wailing, back to the
fenland, still in his grasp Beowulf held the limb. The Grendel had
freed himself by tearing the whole arm out of its socket, and, for
once, the trail of blood across the moors was that of the monster and
not of its victims.

Great indeed was the rejoicing of Hrothgar and of his people when, in
the morning, instead of crimson-stained rushes and the track of vermin
claws imbrued in human blood, they found all but one of the men from
Gothland alive, and looked upon the hideous trophy that told them
that their enemy could only have gone to find a shameful death in the
marshes. They cleansed out the great hall, hung it with lordly
trappings, and made it once more fit habitation for the lordliest in
the land. That night a feast was held in it, such as had never before
been held all through the magnificent reign of Hrothgar. The best of
the scalds sung songs in honour of the triumph of Beowulf, and the
queen herself pledged the hero in a cup of mead and gave to him the
beautiful most richly jewelled collar Brisingamen, of exquisite
ancient workmanship, that once was owned by Freya, queen of the gods,
and a great ring of the purest red gold. To Beowulf, too, the king
gave a banner, all broidered in gold, a sword of the finest, with
helmet and corselet, and eight fleet steeds, and on the back of the
one that he deemed the best Hrothgar had placed his own saddle,
cunningly wrought, and decked with golden ornaments. To each of the
warriors of Beowulf there were also given rich gifts. And ere the
queen, with her maidens, left the hall that night she said to Beowulf:

"Enjoy thy reward, O dear Beowulf, while enjoy it thou canst. Live
noble and blessed! Keep well thy great fame, and to my dear sons, in
time to come, should ever they be in need, be a kind protector!"

With happy hearts in very weary bodies, Beowulf and his men left the
hall when the feast was ended, and they slept through the night in
another lodging as those sleep who have faced death through a very
long night, and to whom joy has come in the morning.

But the Danish knights, careless in the knowledge that the Grendel
must even now be in his dying agonies, and that once more Hereot was
for them a safe and noble sleeping-place, lay themselves down to sleep
in the hall, their shields at their heads, and, fastened high up on
the roof above them, the hideous trophy of Beowulf.

Next morning as the grey dawn broke over the northern sea, it saw a
sight that made it more chill than death. Across the moorland went a
thing--half wolf, half woman--the mother of Grendel. The creature she
had borne had come home to die, and to her belonged his avenging.
Softly she went to Hereot. Softly she opened the unguarded door.
Gladly, in her savage jaws, she seized Aschere, the thane who was to
Hrothgar most dear, and from the roof she plucked her desired
treasure--the arm of Grendel, her son. Then she trotted off to her
far-off, filthy den, leaving behind her the noise of lamentation.

Terrible was the grief of Hrothgar over the death of Aschere, dearest
of friends and sharer of his councils. And to his lamentations Beowulf
listened, sad at heart, humble, yet with a heart that burned for
vengeance. The hideous creature of the night was the mother of
Grendel, as all knew well. On her Beowulf would be avenged, for
Aschere's sake, for the king's, and for the sake of his own honour.
Then once again did he pledge himself to do all that man's strength
could do to rid the land of an evil thing. Well did he know how
dangerous was the task before him, and he gave directions for the
disposal of all that he valued should he never return from his quest.
To the King, who feared greatly that he was going forth on a forlorn
hope, he said:

    "Grieve not!... Each man must undergo death at the end of life.
    Let him win, while he may, warlike fame in the world!
    That is best after death for the slain warrior."

His own men, and Hrothgar, and a great company of Danes went with him
when he set out to trace the blood-stained tracks of the Grendel's
mother. Near the edge of a gloomy mere they found the head of Aschere.
And when they looked at the fiord itself, it seemed to be
blood-stained--stained with blood that ever welled upwards, and in
which revelled with a fierce sort of joy--the rapture of bestial
cruelty--water-monsters without number.

Beowulf, his face white and grim like that of an image of Thor cast in
silver, watched a little while, then drew his bow and drove a bolt
into the heart of one of them, and when they had drawn the slain
carcase to shore, the thanes of Hrothgar marvelled at the horror of
it.

Then Beowulf took leave of Hrothgar and told him that if in two days
he did not return, certain it would be that he would return no more.
The hearts of all who said farewell to him were heavy, but Beowulf
laughed, and bade them be of good cheer. Then into the black waters he
dived, sword in hand, clad in ring-armour, and the dark pool closed
over him as the river of Death closes over the head of a man when his
day is done. To him it seemed as if the space of a day had passed ere
he reached the bottom, and in his passing he encountered many dread
dangers from tusk and horn of a myriad evil creatures of the water who
sought to destroy him. Then at length he reached the bottom of that
sinister mere, and there was clasped in the murderous grip of the
Wolf-Woman who strove to crush his life out against her loathsome
breast. Again and again, when her hideous embrace failed to slay him,
she stabbed him with her knife. Yet ever did he escape. His good
armour resisted the power of her arm, and his own great muscles thrust
her from him. Yet his own sword failed him when he would have smitten
her, and the hero would have been in evil case had he not spied,
hanging on the wall of that most foul den,

                                "A glorious sword,
    An old brand gigantic,      trusty in point and edge,
    An heirloom of heroes."

Swiftly he seized it, and with it he dealt the Wolf-Woman a blow that
shore her head from her body. Through the foul blood that flowed from
her and that mingled with the black water of the mere, Beowulf saw a
very terrible horror--the body of the Grendel, lying moaning out the
last of his life. Again his strong arm descended, and, his left hand
gripping the coiled locks of the Evil Thing, he sprang upwards through
the water, that lost its blackness and its clouded crimson as he went
ever higher and more high. In his hand he still bore the sword that
had saved him, but the poisonous blood of the dying monsters had made
the water of such fiery heat that the blade melted as he rose, and
only the hilt, with strange runes engraved upon it, remained in his
hand.

Where he left them, his followers, and the Danes who went with them,
remained, watching, waiting, ever growing more hopeless as night
turned into day, and day faded into night, and they saw the black
waters of the lonely fen bubbling up, terrible and blood-stained. But
when the waters cleared, hope returned to their hearts, and when, at
length, Beowulf uprose from the water of the mere and they saw that in
his hand he bore the head of the Grendel, there was no lonely scaur,
nor cliff, nor rock of the land of the Danes that did not echo the
glad cry of "_Beowulf! Beowulf!_"

Well-nigh overwhelmed by gifts from those whom he had preserved was
the hero, Beowulf. But in modest, wise words he spoke to the King:

                                "Well hast thou treated us.
    If on this earth I can      do more to win thy love,
    O prince of warriors,      than I have wrought as yet,
    Here stand I ready now      weapons to wield for thee.
    If I shall ever hear      o'er the encircling flood
    That any neighbouring foes      threaten thy nation's fall,
    As Grendel grim before,      swift will I bring to thee
    Thousands of noble thanes,      heroes to help thee."

Then, in their ship, that the Warden of the Coast once had challenged,
Beowulf and his warriors set sail for their own dear land.

Gaily the vessel danced over the waves, heavy though it was with
treasure, nobly gained. And when Beowulf had come in safety to his
homeland and had told his kinsman the tale of the slaying of the
Grendel and of the Wolf-Woman, he gave the finest of his steeds to the
King, and to the Queen the jewelled collar, Brisingamen, that the
Queen of the Goths had bestowed on him. And the heart of his uncle was
glad and proud indeed, and there was much royal banqueting in the
hero's honour. Of him, too, the scalds made up songs, and there was no
hero in all that northern land whose fame was as great as was the fame
of Beowulf.

"The Must Be often helps an undoomed man when he is brave" was the
precept on which he ruled his life, and he never failed the King whose
chief champion and warrior he was. When, in an expedition against the
Frieslanders, King Hygelac fell a victim to the cunning of his foes,
the sword of Beowulf fought nobly for him to the end, and the hero was
a grievously wounded man when he brought back to Gothland the body of
the dead King. The Goths would fain have made him their King, in
Hygelac's stead, but Beowulf was too loyal a soul to supplant his
uncle's own son. On his shield he laid the infant prince, Hardred, and
held him up for the people to see. And when he had proclaimed the
child King and vowed to serve him faithfully all the days of his life,
there was no man there who did not loyally echo the promise of their
hero, Beowulf.

When Hardred, a grown man, was treacherously slain by a son of Othere,
he who discovered the North Cape, Beowulf once again was chosen King,
and for forty years he reigned wisely and well. The fame of his arms
kept war away from the land, and his wisdom as a statesman brought
great prosperity and happiness to his people. He had never known fear,
and so for him there was nothing to dread when the weakness of age
fell upon him and when he knew that his remaining years could be but
few:

    "Seeing that Death, a necessary end,
    Will come when it will come."[9]

Through all those years of peace, the thing that was to bring death to
him had lurked, unknown, unimagined, in a cave in the lonely
mountains.

Many centuries before the birth of Beowulf, a family of mighty
warriors had won by their swords a priceless treasure of weapons and
of armour, of richly chased goblets and cups, of magnificent ornaments
and precious jewels, and of gold "beyond the dreams of avarice." In a
great cave among the rocks it was hoarded by the last of their line,
and on his death none knew where it was hidden. Upon it one day there
stumbled a fiery dragon--a Firedrake--and for three hundred years the
monster gloated, unchallenged, over the magnificent possession. But at
the end of that time, a bondsman, who fled before his master's
vengeance and sought sanctuary in the mountains, came on an opening in
the rocks, and, creeping in, found the Firedrake asleep upon a mass of
red gold and of sparkling gems that dazzled his eyes even in the
darkness. For a moment he stood, trembling, then, sure of his master's
forgiveness if he brought him as gift a golden cup all studded with
jewels, he seized one and fled with it ere the monster could awake.
With its awakening, terror fell upon the land. Hither and thither it
flew, searching for him who had robbed it, and as it flew, it sent
flames on the earth and left behind it a black trail of ruin and of
death.

When news of its destroyings came to the ears of the father of his
people, Beowulf knew that to him belonged the task of saving the land
for them and for all those to come after them. But he was an old man,
and strength had gone from him, nor was he able now to wrestle with
the Firedrake as once he had wrestled with the Grendel and the
Wolf-Woman, but had to trust to his arms. He had an iron shield made
to withstand the Firedrake's flaming breath, and, with a band of
eleven picked followers, and taking the bondsman as guide, Beowulf
went out to fight his last fight. As they drew near the place, he bade
his followers stay where they were, "For I alone," he said, "will win
the gold and save my people, or Death shall take me."

From the entrance to the cave there poured forth a sickening cloud of
steam and smoke, suffocating and blinding, and so hot that he could
not go forward. But with a loud voice the old warrior shouted an
arrogant challenge of defiance to his enemy, and the Firedrake rushed
forth from its lair, roaring with the roar of an unquenchable fire
whose fury will destroy a city. From its wings of flame and from its
eyes heat poured forth scorchingly, and its great mouth belched forth
devouring flames as it cast itself on Beowulf.

[Illustration: A STROKE SHIVERED THE SWORD]

The hero's sword flashed, and smote a stark blow upon its scaly head.
But Beowulf could not deal death strokes as once he had done, and
only for a moment was his adversary stunned. In hideous rage the
monster coiled its snaky folds around him, and the heat from his body
made the iron shield redden as though the blacksmith in his smithy
were welding it, and each ring of the armour that Beowulf wore seared
right into his flesh. His breast swelled with the agony, and his great
heart must have come near bursting for pain and for sorrow. For he saw
that panic had come on his followers and that they were fleeing,
leaving him to his fate. Yet not all of them were faithless. Wiglaf,
young and daring, a dear kinsman of Beowulf, from whom he had received
many a kindness, calling shame on the dastards who fled, rushed
forward, sword in hand, and with no protection but that of his shield
of linden wood. Like a leaf scorched in a furnace the shield curled
up, but new strength came to Beowulf with the knowledge that Wiglaf
had not failed him in his need. Together the two heroes made a gallant
stand, although blood flowed in a swift red stream from a wound that
the monster had made in Beowulf's neck with its venomous fangs, and
ran down his corselet. A stroke which left the Firedrake unharmed
shivered the sword that had seen many fights, but Wiglaf smote a
shrewd blow ere his lord could be destroyed, and Beowulf swiftly drew
his broad knife and, with an effort so great that all the life that
was left in him seemed to go with it, he shore the Firedrake asunder.

Then Beowulf knew that his end drew very near, and when he had thanked
Wiglaf for his loyal help, he bade him enter the cave and bring forth
the treasure that he might please his dying eyes by looking on the
riches that he had won for his people. And Wiglaf hastened into the
cave, for he knew that he raced with Death, and brought forth armfuls
of weapons, of magnificent ornaments, of goblets and of cups, of bars
of red gold. Handfuls of sparkling jewels, too, he brought, and each
time he came and went, seizing without choosing, whatever lay nearest,
it seemed as though the Firedrake's hoard were endless. A magical
golden standard and armour and swords that the dwarfs had made brought
a smile of joy into the dying King's eyes. And when the ten shamed
warriors, seeing that the fight was at an end, came to where their
mighty ruler lay, they found him lying near the vile carcase of the
monster he had slain, and surrounded by a dazzlement of treasure
uncountable. To them, and to Wiglaf, Beowulf spoke his valediction,
urging on them to maintain the honour of the land of the Goths, and
then he said:

    "I thank God eternal,      the great King of Glory,
    For the vast treasures      which I here gaze upon,
    That I ere my death-day      might for my people
    Win so great wealth--      Since I have given my life,
    Thou must now look to      the needs of the nation;
    Here dwell I no longer,      for Destiny calleth me!
    Bid thou my warriors      after my funeral pyre
    Build me a burial-cairn      high on the sea-cliffs head;
    It shall for memory      tower up to Hronesness,
    So that the sea-farers      Beowulf's Barrow
    Henceforth shall name it,      they who drive far and wide
    Over the mighty flood      their foaming Reels.
    Thou art the last of all      the kindred of Wagmund!
    Wyrd[10] has swept all my kin,      all the brave chiefs away!
    Now must I follow them!"

Such was the passing of Beowulf, greatest of Northern heroes, and
under a mighty barrow on a cliff very high above the sea, they buried
him, and with him a great fortune from the treasure he had won. Then
with heavy hearts, "round about the mound rode his hearth-sharers, who
sang that he was of kings, of men, the mildest, kindest, to his people
sweetest, and the readiest in search of praise":

    "Gentlest, most gracious, most keen to win glory."

And if, in time, the great deeds of a mighty king of the Goths have
become more like fairy tale than solid history, this at least we know,
that whether it is in Saeland or on the Yorkshire coast--where

    "High on the sea-cliff ledges
    The white gulls are trooping and crying"

--the barrow of Beowulf covers a very valiant hero, a very perfect
gentleman.


FOOTNOTES:

[9] Shakespeare (_Julius C√¶sar_).

[10] Goddess of Fate.




ROLAND THE PALADIN

    "Roland, the flower of chivalry,
    Expired at Roncevall."

        Thomas Campbell.

    "Hero-worship endures for ever while man
    endures."

        Carlyle.

    "Roland, the gode knight."

        Turpin's _History of Charlemagne_.


The old chroniclers tell us that on that momentous morning when
William the Conqueror led his army to victory at Hastings, a Norman
knight named Taillefer (and a figure of iron surely was his) spurred
his horse to the front. In face of the enemy who hated all things that
had to do with France, he lifted up his voice and chanted aloud the
exploits of Charlemagne and of Roland. As he sang, he threw his sword
in the air and always caught it in his right hand as it fell, and,
proudly, the whole army, moving at once, joined with him in the
_Chanson de Roland_, and shouted, as chorus, "God be our help! God be
our help!"

    "Taillefer ... chantoit de Rollant
    Et d'Olivier, et de Vassaux
    Qui mourent en Rainschevaux."

        Wace, _Roman de Rose_.

Fifteen thousand of those who sang fell on that bloody day, and one
wonders how many of those who went down to the Shades owed half their
desperate courage to the remembrance of the magnificent deeds of the
hero of whom they sang, ere ever sword met sword, or spear met the
sullen impact of the stark frame of a Briton born, fighting for his
own.

The story of Roland, so we are told, is only a splendid coating of
paint put on a very slender bit of drawing. A contemporary chronicle
tells of the battle of Roncesvalles, and says: "In which battle was
slain Roland, prefect of the marches of Brittany." Merely a Breton
squire, we are told to believe--a very gallant country gentleman whose
name would not have been preserved in priestly archives had he not won
for himself, by his fine courage, such an unfading laurel crown. But
because we are so sure that "it is the memory that the soldier leaves
after him, like the long trail of light that follows the sunken sun,"
and because so often oral tradition is less misleading than the
written word, we gladly and undoubtingly give Roland high place in the
Valhalla of heroes of all races and of every time.

777 or 778 A.D. is the date fixed for the great fight at Roncesvalles,
where Roland won death and glory. Charlemagne, King of the Franks, and
Head of the Holy Roman Empire, was returning victoriously from a seven
years' campaign against the Saracens in Spain.

    "No fortress stands before him unsubdued,
    Nor wall, nor city left to be destroyed,"

save one--the city of Saragossa, the stronghold of King Marsile or
Marsiglio. Here amongst the mountains the King and his people still
held to their idols, worshipped "Mahommed, Apollo, and Termagaunt,"
and looked forward with horror to a day when the mighty Charlemagne
might, by the power of the sword, thrust upon them the worship of the
crucified Christ. Ere Charlemagne had returned to his own land,
Marsile held a council with his peers. To believe that the great
conqueror would rest content with Saragossa still unconquered was too
much to hope for. Surely he would return to force his religion upon
them. What, then, was it best to do? A very wily emir was Blancandrin,
brave in war, and wise in counsel, and on his advice Marsile sent
ambassadors to Charlemagne to ask of him upon what conditions he would
be allowed to retain his kingdom in peace and to continue to worship
the gods of his fathers. Mounted on white mules, with silver saddles,
and with reins of gold, and bearing olive branches in their hands,
Blancandrin and the ten messengers sent by Marsile arrived at Cordova,
where Charlemagne rested with his army. Fifteen thousand tried
veterans were with him there, and his "Douzeperes"--his Twelve
Peers--who were to him what the Knights of the Round Table were to
King Arthur of Britain. He held his court in an orchard, and under a
great pine tree from which the wild honeysuckle hung like a fragrant
canopy, the mighty king and emperor sat on a throne of gold.

The messengers of Marsile saw a man of much more than ordinary stature
and with the commanding presence of one who might indeed conquer
kingdoms, but his sword was laid aside and he watched contentedly the
contests between the older of his knights who played chess under the
shade of the fruit trees, and the fencing bouts of the younger
warriors. Very dear to him were all his Douzeperes, yet dearest of all
was his own nephew, Roland. In him he saw his own youth again, his own
imperiousness, his reckless gallantry, his utter fearlessness--all
those qualities which endeared him to the hearts of other men. Roland
was his sister's son, and it was an evil day for the fair Bertha when
she told her brother that, in spite of his anger and scorn, she had
disobeyed his commands and had wed the man she loved, Milon, a poor
young knight.

No longer would Charlemagne recognise her as sister, and in obscurity
and poverty Roland was born. He was still a very tiny lad when his
father, in attempting to ford a flooded river, was swept down-stream
and drowned, and Bertha had no one left to fend for her and for her
child. Soon they had no food left, and the little Roland watched with
amazed eyes his famished mother growing so weak that she could not
rise from the bed where she lay, nor answer him when he pulled her by
the hand and tried to make her come with him to seek his father and to
find something to eat. And when he saw that it was hopeless, the child
knew that he must take his father's place and get food for the mother
who lay so pale, and so very still. Into a great hall where
Charlemagne and his lords were banqueting Roland strayed. Here was
food in plenty! Savoury smelling, delicious to his little empty
stomach were the daintily cooked meats which the Emperor and his court
ate from off their silver platters. Only one plateful of food such as
this must, of a surety, make his dear mother strong and well once
more. Not for a moment did Roland hesitate. Even as a tiny sparrow
darts into a lion's cage and picks up a scrap almost out of the
monarch's hungry jaws, so acted Roland. A plateful of food stood
beside the King. At this Roland sprang, seized it with both hands, and
joyfully ran off with his prey. When the serving men would have caught
him, Charlemagne, laughing, bade them desist.

"A hungry one this," he said, "and very bold."

So the meal went on, and when Roland had fed his mother with some
pieces of the rich food and had seen her gradually revive, yet another
thought came to his baby mind.

"My father gave her wine," he thought. "They were drinking wine in
that great hall. It will make her white cheeks red again."

Thus he ran back, as fast as his legs could carry him, and Charlemagne
smiled yet more when he saw the beautiful child, who knew no fear,
return to the place where he had thieved. Right up to the King's chair
he came, solemnly measured with his eye the cups of wine that the
great company quaffed, saw that the cup of Charlemagne was the most
beautiful and the fullest of the purple-red wine, stretched out a
daring little hand, grasped the cup, and prepared to go off again,
like a marauding bright-eyed bird. Then the King seized in his own
hand the hand that held the cup.

"No! no! bold thief," he said, "I cannot have my golden cup stolen
from me, be it done by ever so sturdy a robber. Tell me, who sent thee
out to steal?"

And Roland, an erect, gallant, little figure, his hand still in the
iron grip of the King, fearlessly and proudly gazed back into the eyes
of Charlemagne.

"No one sent me," he said. "My mother lay very cold and still and
would not speak, and she had said my father would come back no more,
so there was none but me to seek her food. Give me the wine, I say!
for she is so cold and so very, very white"--and the child struggled
to free his hand that still held the cup.

"Who art thou, then?" asked Charlemagne.

"My name is Roland--let me go, I pray thee," and again he tried to
drag himself free. And Charlemagne mockingly said:

"Roland, I fear thy father and mother have taught thee to be a clever
thief."

Then anger blazed in Roland's eyes.

"My mother is a lady of high degree!" he cried, "and I am her page,
her cupbearer, her knight! I do not speak false words!"--and he would
have struck the King for very rage.

Then Charlemagne turned to his lords and asked--"Who is this child?"

And one made answer: "He is the son of thy sister Bertha, and of Milon
the knight, who was drowned these three weeks agone."

Then the heart of Charlemagne grew heavy with remorse when he found
that his sister had so nearly died of want, and from that day she
never knew aught but kindness and tenderness from him, while Roland
was dear to him as his own child.

He was a Douzepere now, and when the envoys from Saragossa had
delivered their message to Charlemagne, he was one of those who helped
to do them honour at a great feast that was held for them in a
pavilion raised in the orchard.

Early in the morning Charlemagne heard mass, and then, on his golden
throne under the great pine, he sat and took counsel with his
Douzeperes. Not one of them trusted Marsile, but Ganelon, who had
married the widowed Bertha and who had a jealous hatred for his
step-son--so beloved by his mother, so loved and honoured by the
King--was ever ready to oppose the counsel of Roland. Thus did he
persuade Charlemagne to send a messenger to Marsile, commanding him to
deliver up the keys of Saragossa, in all haste to become a Christian,
and in person to come and, with all humility, pay homage as vassal to
Charlemagne.

Then arose the question as to which of the peers should bear the
arrogant message. Roland, ever greedy for the post of danger,
impetuously asked that he might be chosen. But Charlemagne would have
neither him nor his dear friend and fellow-knight, Oliver--he who was
the Jonathan of Roland's David--nor would he have Naismes de Bavi√®re,
nor Turpin, "the chivalrous and undaunted Bishop of Rheims." He could
not afford to risk their lives, and Marsile was known to be
treacherous. Then he said to his peers:

"Choose ye for me whom I shall send. Let it be one who is wise;
brave, yet not over-rash, and who will defend mine honour valiantly."

Then Roland, who never knew an ungenerous thought, quickly said:
"Then, indeed, it must be Ganelon who goes, for if he goes, or if he
stays, you have none better than he."

And all the other peers applauded the choice, and Charlemagne said to
Ganelon:

"Come hither, Ganelon, and receive my staff and glove, which the voice
of all the Franks have given to thee."

But the honour which all the others coveted was not held to be an
honour by Ganelon. In furious rage he turned upon Roland:

"You and your friends have sent me to my death!" he cried. "But if by
a miracle I should return, look you to yourself, Roland, for assuredly
I shall be revenged!"

And Roland grew red, then very white, and said:

"I had taken thee for another man, Ganelon. Gladly will I take thy
place. Wilt give me the honour to bear thy staff and glove to
Saragossa, sire?" And eagerly he looked Charlemagne in the face--eager
as, when a child, he had craved the cup of wine for his mother's sake.

But Charlemagne, with darkened brow, shook his head.

"Ganelon must go," he said, "for so have I commanded. Go! for the
honour of Jesus Christ, and for your Emperor."

Thus, sullenly and unwillingly, and with burning hatred against
Roland in his heart, Ganelon accompanied the Saracens back to
Saragossa. A hate so bitter was not easy to hide, and as he rode
beside him the wily Blancandrin was not long in laying a probing
finger on this festering sore. Soon he saw that Ganelon would pay even
the price of his honour to revenge himself upon Roland and on the
other Douzeperes whose lives were more precious than his in the eyes
of Charlemagne. Yet, when Saragossa was reached, like a brave man and
a true did Ganelon deliver the insulting message that his own brain
had conceived and that the Emperor, with magnificent arrogance, had
bidden him deliver. And this he did, although he knew his life hung
but by a thread while Marsile and the Saracen lords listened to his
words. But Marsile kept his anger under, thinking with comfort of what
Blancandrin had told him of his discovery by the way. And very soon he
had shown Ganelon how he might be avenged on Roland and on the friends
of Roland, and in a manner which his treachery need never be known,
and very rich were the bribes that he offered to the faithless knight.

Thus it came about that Ganelon sold his honour, and bargained with
the Saracens to betray Roland and his companions into their hands in
their passage of the narrow defiles of Roncesvalles. For more than
fifty pieces of silver Marsile purchased the soul of Ganelon, and when
this Judas of the Douzeperes returned in safety to Cordova, bringing
with him princely gifts for Charlemagne, the keys of Saragossa, and
the promise that in sixteen days Marsile would repair to France to do
homage and to embrace the Christian faith, the Emperor was happy
indeed. All had fallen out as he desired. Ganelon, who had gone forth
in wrath, had returned calm and gallant, and had carried himself
throughout his difficult embassy as a wise statesman and a brave and
loyal soldier.

"Thou hast done well, Ganelon," said the king. "I give thanks to my
God and to thee. Thou shalt be well rewarded."

The order then was speedily given for a return to France, and for ten
miles the great army marched before they halted and encamped for the
night. But when Charlemagne slept, instead of dreams of peace he had
two dreams which disturbed him greatly. In the first, Ganelon roughly
seized the imperial spear of tough ash-wood and it broke into
splinters in his hand. In the next, Charlemagne saw himself attacked
by a leopard and a bear, which tore off his right arm, and as a
greyhound darted to his aid he awoke, and rose from his couch heavy at
heart because of those dreams of evil omen.

In the morning he held a council and reminded his knights of the
dangers of the lonely pass of Roncesvalles. It was a small oval plain,
shut in all round, save on the south where the river found its outlet,
by precipitous mountain ridges densely covered with beech woods.
Mountains ran sheer up to the sky above it, precipices rushed sheer
down below, and the path that crossed the crest of the Pyrenees and
led to it was so narrow that it must be traversed in single file. The
dangers for the rearguard naturally seemed to Charlemagne to be the
greatest, and to his Douzeperes he turned, as before, for counsel.

"Who, then, shall command the rearguard?" he asked. And quickly
Ganelon answered, "Who but Roland? Ever would he seek the post where
danger lies."

And Charlemagne, feeling he owed much to Ganelon, gave way to his
counsel, though with heavy forebodings in his heart. Then all the
other Douzeperes, save Ganelon, said that for love of Roland they
would go with him and see him safely through the dangers of the way.
Loudly they vaunted his bravery:

    "_For dred of dethe, he hid neuer his hed._"

Leaving them behind with twenty thousand men, and with Ganelon
commanding the vanguard, Charlemagne started.

"Christ keep you!" he said on parting with Roland--"_I betak you to
Crist._"

And Roland, clad in his shining armour, his lordly helmet on his head,
his sword Durendala by his side, his horn Olifant slung round him, and
his flower-painted shield on his arm, mounted his good steed
Veillantif, and, holding his bright lance with its white pennon and
golden fringe in his hand, led the way for his fellow-knights and for
the other Franks who so dearly loved him.

Not far from the pass of Roncesvalles he saw, gleaming against the
dark side of the purple mountain, the spears of the Saracens. Ten
thousand men, under Sir Gautier, were sent by Roland to reconnoitre,
but from every side the heathen pressed upon them, and every one of
the ten thousand were slain--hurled into the valley far down below.
Gautier alone, sorely wounded, returned to Roland, to tell him, ere
his life ebbed away, of the betrayal by Ganelon, and to warn him of
the ambush. Yet even then they were at Roncesvalles, and the warning
came too late. Afar off, amongst the beech trees, and coming down
amongst the lonely passes of the mountains, the Franks could see the
gleam of silver armour, and Oliver, well knowing that not even the
most dauntless valour could withstand such a host as the one that came
against them, besought Roland to blow a blast on his magic horn that
Charlemagne might hear and return to aid him. And all the other
Douzeperes begged of him that thus he would call for help. But Roland
would not listen to them.

    "I will fight with them that us hathe sought
    And or I se my brest blod throughe my harnes ryn
    Blow never horn for no help then."

Through the night they knew their enemies were coming ever nearer,
hemming them in, but there were no night alarms, and day broke fair
and still. There was no wind, there was dew on the grass; "dew dymmd
the floures," and amongst the trees the birds sang merrily. At
daybreak the good Bishop Turpin celebrated Mass and blessed them, and
even as his voice ceased they beheld the Saracen host close upon them.
Then Roland spoke brave words of cheer to his army and commended their
souls and his own to Christ, "who suffrid for us paynes sore," and
for whose sake they had to fight the enemies of the Cross. Behind
every tree and rock a Saracen seemed to be hidden, and in a moment the
whole pass was alive with men in mortal strife.

Surely never in any fight were greater prodigies of valour performed
than those of Roland and his comrades. Twelve Saracen kings fell
before their mighty swords, and many a Saracen warrior was hurled down
the cliffs to pay for the lives of the men of France whom they had
trapped to their death. Never before, in one day, did one man slay so
many as did Roland and Oliver his friend--"A Roland for an Oliver" was
no good exchange, and yet a very fair one, as the heathen quickly
learned.

    "Red was Roland, red with bloodshed;
    Red his corselet, red his shoulders,
    Red his arm, and red his charger."

In the thickest of the fight he and Oliver came together, and Roland
saw that his friend was using for weapon and dealing death-blows with
the truncheon of a spear.

    "'Friend, what hast thou there?' cried Roland.
    'In this game 'tis not a distaff,
    But a blade of steel thou needest.
    Where is now Hauteclaire, thy good sword,
    Golden-hilted, crystal-pommelled?'
    'Here,' said Oliver; 'so fight I
    That I have not time to draw it.'
    'Friend,' quoth Roland, 'more I love thee
    Ever henceforth than a brother.'"

When the sun set on that welter of blood, not a single Saracen was
left, and those of the Frankish rearguard who still lived were very
weary men.

Then Roland called on his men to give thanks to God, and Bishop
Turpin, whose stout arm had fought well on that bloody day, offered up
thanks for the army, though in sorry plight were they, almost none
unwounded, their swords and lances broken, and their hauberks rent and
blood-stained. Gladly they laid themselves down to rest beside the
comrades whose eyes never more would open on the fair land of France,
but even as Roland was about to take his rest he saw descending upon
him and his little band a host of Saracens, led by Marsile himself.

A hundred thousand men, untired, and fiercely thirsting for revenge,
came against the handful of wearied, wounded heroes. Yet with
unwavering courage the Franks responded to their leaders' call.

The war-cry of the soldiers of France--"Montjoie! Montjoie!"--rang
clear above the fierce sound of the trumpets of the Saracen army.

    "'Soldiers of the Lord,' cried Turpin,
    'Be ye valiant and steadfast,
    For this day shall crowns be given you
    Midst the flowers of Paradise.
    In the name of God our Saviour,
    Be ye not dismayed nor frighted,
    Lest of you be shameful legends
    Chanted by the tongues of minstrels.
    Rather let us die victorious,
    Since this eve shall see us lifeless!--
    Heaven has no room for cowards!
    Knights, who nobly fight, and vainly,
    Ye shall sit among the holy
    In the blessed fields of Heaven.
    On then, Friends of God, to glory!'"

Marsile fell, the first victim to a blow from the sword of Roland,
and even more fiercely than the one that had preceded it, waged this
terrible fight.

And now it seemed as though the Powers of Good and of Evil also took
part in the fray, for a storm swept down from the mountains, thick
darkness fell, and the rumble of thunder and the rush of heavy rain
dulled the shouts of those who fought and the clash and clang of their
weapons. When a blood-red cloud came up, its lurid light showed the
trampled ground strewn with dead and dying. At that piteous sight
Roland proposed to send a messenger to Charlemagne to ask him for aid,
but it was then too late.

When only sixty Franks remained, the pride of Roland gave way to pity
for the men whom he had led to death, and he took the magic horn
Olifant in his hand, that he might blow on it a blast that would bring
Charlemagne, his mighty army behind him, to wipe out the Saracen host
that had done him such evil. But Oliver bitterly protested. Earlier in
the day, when he had willed it, Roland had refused to call for help.
Now the day was done. The twilight of death--Death the inevitable--was
closing in upon them. Why, then, call now for Charlemagne, when nor he
nor any other could help them? But Turpin with all his force backed
the wish of Roland.

"The blast of thy horn cannot bring back the dead to life," he said.
"Yet if our Emperor return he can save our corpses and weep over them
and bear them reverently to la belle France. And there shall they lie
in sanctuary, and not in a Paynim land where the wild beasts devour
them and croaking wretches with foul beaks tear our flesh and leave
our bones dishonoured."

"That is well said," quoth Roland and Oliver.

Then did Roland blow three mighty blasts upon his horn, and so great
was the third that a blood-vessel burst, and the red drops trickled
from his mouth.

For days on end Charlemagne had been alarmed at the delay of his
rearguard, but ever the false Ganelon had reassured him.

"Why shouldst thou fear, sire?" he asked. "Roland has surely gone
after some wild boar or deer, so fond is he of the chase."

But when Roland blew the blast that broke his mighty heart,
Charlemagne heard it clearly, and no longer had any doubt of the
meaning of its call. He knew that his dreams had come true, and at
once he set his face towards the dire pass of Roncesvalles that he
might, even at the eleventh hour, save Roland and his men.

Long ere Charlemagne could reach the children of his soul who stood in
such dire need, the uncle of Marsile had reached the place of battle
with a force of fifty thousand men. Pierced from behind by a cowardly
lance, Oliver was sobbing out his life's blood. Yet ever he cried,
"Montjoie! Montjoie!" and each time his voice formed the words, a
thrust from his sword, or from the lances of his men, drove a soul
down to Hades. And when he was breathing his last, and lay on the
earth, humbly confessing his sins and begging God to grant him rest in
Paradise, he asked God's blessing upon Charlemagne, his lord the
king, and upon his fair land of France, and, above all other men, to
keep free from scathe his heart's true brother and comrade, Roland,
the gallant knight. Then did he gently sigh his last little measure of
life away, and as Roland bent over him he felt that half of the
glamour of living was gone. Yet still so dearly did he love Aude the
Fair, the sister of Oliver, who was to be his bride, that his muscles
grew taut as he gripped his sword, and his courage was the dauntless
courage of a furious wave that faces all the cliffs of a rocky coast
in a winter storm, when again, he faced the Saracen host.

Of all the Douzeperes, only Gautier and Turpin and Roland now
remained, and with them a poor little handful of maimed men-at-arms.
Soon a Saracen arrow drove through the heart of Gautier, and Turpin,
wounded by four lances, stood alone by Roland's side. But for each
lance thrust he slew a hundred men, and when at length he fell,
Roland, himself sorely wounded, seized once more his horn and blew
upon it a piercing blast:

      "... a blast of that dread horn,
    On Fontarabian echoes borne,
      That to King Charles did come,
    When Rowland brave, and Olivier,
    And every paladin and peer,
      On Roncesvalles died."

        Sir Walter Scott.

[Illustration: ROLAND SEIZED ONCE MORE HIS HORN]

That blast pierced right into the heart of Charlemagne, and
straightway he turned his army towards the pass of Roncesvalles that
he might succour Roland, whom he so greatly loved. Yet then it was too
late. Turpin was nearly dead. Roland knew himself to be dying.
Veillantif, Roland's faithful warhorse, was enduring agonies from
wounds of the Paynim arrows, and him Roland slew with a shrewd blow
from his well-tried sword. From far, far away the hero could hear the
blare of the trumpets of the Frankish army, and, at the sound, what
was left of the Saracen host fled in terror. He made his way, blindly,
painfully, to where Turpin lay, and with fumbling fingers took off his
hauberk and unlaced his golden helmet. With what poor skill was left
to him, he strove to bind up his terrible wounds with strips of his
own tunic, and he dragged him, as gently as he could, to a spot under
the beech trees where the fresh moss still was green.

    "'Ah, gentle lord,' said Roland, 'give me leave
    To carry here our comrades who are dead,
    Whom we so dearly loved; they must not lie
    Unblest; but I will bring their corpses here
    And thou shalt bless them, and me, ere thou die.'
    'Go,' said the dying priest, 'but soon return.
    Thank God! the victory is yours and mine!'"

With exquisite pain Roland carried the bodies of Oliver and of the
rest of the Douzeperes from the places where they had died to where
Turpin, their dear bishop, lay a-dying. Each step that he took cost
him a pang of agony; each step took from him a toll of blood. Yet
faithfully he performed his task, until they all lay around Turpin,
who gladly blessed them and absolved them all. And then the agony of
soul and of heart and body that Roland had endured grew overmuch for
him to bear, and he gave a great cry, like the last sigh of a mighty
tree that the woodcutters fell, and dropped down, stiff and chill, in
a deathly swoon. Then the dying bishop dragged himself towards him and
lifted the horn Olifant, and with it in his hand he struggled, inch by
inch, with very great pain and labour, to a little stream that
trickled down the dark ravine, that he might fetch some water to
revive the hero that he and all men loved. But ere he could reach the
stream, the mists of death had veiled his eyes. He joined his hands in
prayer, though each movement meant a pang, and gave his soul to
Christ, his Saviour and his Captain. And so passed away the soul of a
mighty warrior and a stainless priest.

Thus was Roland alone amongst the dead when consciousness came back to
him. With feeble hands he unlaced his helmet and tended to himself as
best he might. And, as Turpin had done, so also did he painfully crawl
towards the stream. There he found Turpin, the horn Olifant by his
side, and knew that it was in trying to fetch him water that the brave
bishop had died, and for tenderness and pity the hero wept.

    "Alas! brave priest, fair lord of noble birth,
    Thy soul I give to the great King of Heaven!

               *   *   *   *   *

    May thy fair soul escape the pains of Hell,
    And Paradise receive thee in its bowers!"

Then did Roland know that for him, also, there "was no other way but
death." With dragging steps he toiled uphill a little way, his good
sword Durendala in one hand, and in the other his horn Olifant. Under
a little clump of pines were some rough steps hewn in a boulder of
marble leading yet higher up the hill, and these Roland would have
climbed, but his throbbing heart could no more, and again he fell
swooning on the ground. A Saracen who, out of fear, had feigned death,
saw him lying there and crawled out of the covert where he lay
concealed.

"It is Roland, the nephew of the Emperor!" he joyously thought, and in
triumph he said to himself, "I shall bear his sword back with me!" But
as his Pagan hand touched the hilt of the sword and would have torn it
from Roland's dying grasp, the hero was aroused from his swoon. One
great stroke cleft the Saracen's skull and laid him dead at Roland's
feet. Then to Durendala Roland spoke:

    "I surely die; but, ere I end,
    Let me be sure that thou art ended too my friend!
    For should a heathen grasp thee when I am clay,
    My ghost would grieve full sore until the judgment day!"

More ghost than man he looked as with a mighty effort of will and of
body he struggled to his feet and smote with his blade the marble
boulder. Before the stroke the marble split asunder as though the
pick-axe of a miner had cloven it. On a rock of sardonyx he strove to
break it then, but Durendala remained unharmed. A third time he
strove, and struck a rock of blue marble with such force that the
sparks rushed out as from a blacksmith's anvil. Then he knew that it
was in vain, for Durendala would not be shattered. And so he raised
Olifant to his lips and blew a dying blast that echoed down the cliffs
and up to the mountain tops and rang through the trees of the forest.
And still, to this day, do they say, when the spirit of the warrior
rides by night down the heights and through the dark pass of
Roncesvalles, even such a blast may be heard, waking all the echoes
and sounding through the lonely hollows of the hills.

Then he made confession, and with a prayer for pardon of his sins and
for mercy from the God whose faithful servant and soldier he had been
unto his life's end, the soul of Roland passed away.

              "... With hands devoutly joined
    He breathed his last. God sent his Cherubim,
    Saint Raphael, Saint Michel del Peril.
    Together with them Gabriel came.--All bring
    The soul of Count Rolland to Paradise.
                                      Aoi."

Charlemagne and his army found him lying thus, and very terrible were
the grief and the rage of the Emperor as he looked on him and on the
others of his Douzeperes and on the bodies of that army of twenty
thousand.

"All the field was with blod ouer roun"--"Many a good swerd was broken
ther"--"Many a fadirles child ther was at home."

By the side of Roland, Charlemagne vowed vengeance, but ere he avenged
his death he mourned over him with infinite anguish:

    "'The Lord have mercy, Roland, on thy soul!
    Never again shall our fair France behold
    A knight so worthy, till France be no more!

               *   *   *   *   *

    How widowed lies our fair France, and how lone!
    How will the realms that I have swayed rebel,
    Now thou art taken from my weary age!
    So deep my woe that fain would I die too
    And join my valiant Peers in Paradise,
    While men inter my weary limbs with thine!'"

A terrible vengeance was the one that he took next day, when the
Saracen army was utterly exterminated; and when all the noble dead had
been buried where they fell, save only Roland, Oliver, and Turpin, the
bodies of these three heroes were carried to Blaye and interred with
great honour in the great cathedral there.

Charlemagne then returned to Aix, and as he entered his palace, Aude
the Fair, sister of Oliver, and the betrothed of Roland, hastened to
meet him. Where were the Douzeperes? What was the moaning murmur as of
women who wept, that had heralded the arrival in the town of the
Emperor and his conquering army? Eagerly she questioned Charlemagne of
the safety of Roland, and when the Emperor, in pitying grief, told
her:

"Roland, thy hero, like a hero died," Aude gave a bitter cry and fell
to the ground like a white lily slain by a cruel wind. The Emperor
thought she had fainted, but when he would have lifted her up, he
found that she was dead, and, in infinite pity, he had her taken to
Blaye and buried by the side of Roland.

Very tender was Charlemagne to the maiden whom Roland had loved, but
when the treachery of Ganelon had been proved, for him there was no
mercy. At Aix-la-Chapelle, torn asunder by wild horses, he met a
shameful and a horrible death, nor is his name forgotten as that of
the blackest of traitors. But the memory of Roland and of the other
Douzeperes lives on and is, however fanciful, forever fragrant.

                    "... Roland, and Olyvere,
    And of the twelve Tussypere,
    That dieden in the batayle of Runcyvale;
    Jesu lord, heaven king,
    To his bliss hem and us both bring,
    To liven withouten bale!"

        Sir Otuel.




THE CHILDREN OF L√éR

    "Silent, O Moyle, be the roar of thy water;
    Break not, ye breezes, your chain of repose;
    While murmuring mournfully, L√Ær's lonely daughter
    Tells to the night-star her tale of woes."

        Moore.


They are the tragedies, not the comedies of the old, old days that are
handed down to us, and the literature of the Celts is rich in tragedy.
To the romantic and sorrowful imagination of the Celts of the green
island of Erin we owe the hauntingly piteous story of the children of
L√Ær.

In the earliest times of all, when Ireland was ruled by the Dedannans,
a people who came from Europe and brought with them from Greece magic
and other arts so wonderful that the people of the land believed them
to be gods, the Dedannans had so many chiefs that they met one day to
decide who was the best man of them all, that they might choose him to
be their king. The choice fell upon Bodb the Red, and gladly did every
man acclaim him as king, all save L√Ær of Shee Finnaha, who left the
council in great wrath because he thought that he, and not Bodb,
should have been chosen. In high dudgeon he retired to his own place,
and in the years that followed he and Bodb the Red waged fierce war
against one another. At last a great sorrow came to L√Ær, for after an
illness of three days his wife, who was very dear to him, was taken
from him by death. Then Bodb saw an opportunity for reconciliation
with the chief whose enemy he had no wish to be. And to the
grief-stricken husband he sent a message:

"My heart weeps for thee, yet I pray thee to be comforted. In my house
have I three maidens, my foster-daughters, the most beautiful and the
best instructed in all Erin. Choose which one thou wilt for thy wife,
and own me for thy lord, and my friendship shall be thine forever."

And the message brought comfort to L√Ær, and he set out with a gallant
company of fifty chariots, nor ever halted until he had reached the
palace of Bodb the Red at Lough Derg, on the Shannon. Warm and kindly
was the welcome that L√Ær received from his overlord, and next day, as
the three beautiful foster-daughters of Bodb sat on the same couch as
his queen, Bodb said to L√Ær:

"Behold my three daughters. Choose which one thou wilt."

And L√Ær answered, "They are all beautiful, but Eve is the eldest, so
she must be the noblest of the three. I would have her for my wife."

That day he married Eve, and L√Ær took his fair young wife back with
him to his own place, Shee Finnaha, and happy were both of them in
their love. To them in course of time were born a twin son and a
daughter. The daughter they named Finola and the son Aed, and the
children were as beautiful, as good, and as happy as their mother.
Again she bore twins, boys, whom they named Ficra and Conn, but as
their eyes opened on the world, the eyes of their mother closed on
pleasant life forever, and once again L√Ær was a widower, more bowed
down by grief than before.

The tidings of the death of Eve brought great sorrow to the palace of
Bodb the Red, for to all who knew her Eve was very dear. But again the
king sent a message of comfort to L√Ær:

"We sorrow with thee, yet in proof of our friendship with thee and our
love for the one who is gone, we would give thee another of our
daughters to be a mother to the children who have lost their mother's
care."

And again L√Ær went to the palace at Loch Derg, the Great Lake, and
there he married Eva, the second of the foster-daughters of the king.

At first it seemed as if Eva loved her dead sister's children as
though they were her own. But when she saw how passionate was her
husband's devotion to them, how he would have them to sleep near him
and would rise at their slightest whimper to comfort and to caress
them, and how at dawn she would wake to find he had left her side to
see that all was well with them, the poisonous weed of jealousy began
to grow up in the garden of her heart. She was a childless woman, and
she knew not whether it was her sister who had borne them whom she
hated, or whether she hated the children themselves. But steadily the
hatred grew, and the love that Bodb the Red bore for them only
embittered her the more. Many times in the year he would come to see
them, many times would take them away to stay with him, and each year
when the Dedannans held the Feast of Age--the feast of the great god
Mannanan, of which those who partook never grew old--the four children
of L√Ær were present, and gave joy to all who beheld them by their
great beauty, their nobility, and their gentleness.

But as the love that all others gave to the four children of L√Ær grew,
the hatred of Eva, their stepmother, kept pace with it, until at
length the poison in her heart ate into her body as well as her soul,
and she grew worn and ill out of her very wickedness. For nearly a
year she lay sick in bed, while the sound of the children's laughter
and their happy voices, their lovely faces like the faces of the
children of a god, and the proud and loving words with which their
father spoke of them were, to her, like acid in a festering wound. At
last there came a black day when jealousy had choked all the flowers
of goodness in her heart, and only treachery and merciless cruelty
remained. She rose from her couch and ordered the horses to be yoked
to her chariot that she might take the four children to the Great Lake
to see the king, her foster-father. They were but little children, yet
the instinct that sometimes tells even a very little child when it is
near an evil thing, warned Finola that harm would come to her and to
her brothers were they to go. It may also have been, perhaps, that she
had seen, with the sharp vision of a woman child, the thing to which
L√Ær was quite blind, and that in a tone of her stepmother's voice, in
a look she had surprised in her eyes, she had learned that the love
that her father's wife professed for her and for the others was only
hatred, cunningly disguised. Thus she tried to make excuses for
herself and the little brothers to whom she was a child-mother, so
that they need not go. But Eva listened with deaf ears, and the
children said farewell to L√Ær, who must have wondered at the tears
that stood in Finola's eyes and the shadow that darkened their blue,
and drove off in the chariot with their stepmother.

When they had driven a long way, Eva turned to her attendants: "Much
wealth have I," she said, "and all that I have shall be yours if you
will slay for me those four hateful things that have stolen from me
the love of my man."

The servants heard her in horror, and in horror and shame for her they
answered: "Fearful is the deed thou wouldst have us do; more fearful
still is it that thou shouldst have so wicked a thought. Evil will
surely come upon thee for having wished to take the lives of L√Ær's
innocent little children."

Angrily, then, she seized a sword and herself would fain have done
what her servants had scorned to do. But she lacked strength to carry
out her own evil wish, and so they journeyed onwards. They came to
Lake Darvra at last--now Lough Derravaragh, in West Meath--and there
they all alighted from the chariot, and the children, feeling as
though they had been made to play at an ugly game, but that now it was
over and all was safety and happiness again, were sent into the loch
to bathe. Joyously and with merry laughter the little boys splashed
into the clear water by the rushy shore, all three seeking to hold
the hands of their sister, whose little slim white body was whiter
than the water-lilies and her hair more golden than their hearts.

It was then that Eva struck them, as a snake strikes its prey. One
touch for each, with a magical wand of the Druids, then the low
chanting of an old old rune, and the beautiful children had vanished,
and where their tiny feet had pressed the sand and their yellow hair
had shown above the water like four daffodil heads that dance in the
wind, there floated four white swans. But although to Eva belonged the
power of bewitching their bodies, their hearts and souls and speech
still belonged to the children of L√Ær. And when Finola spoke, it was
not as a little timid child, but as a woman who could look with sad
eyes into the future and could there see the terrible punishment of a
shameful act.

"Very evil is the deed that thou hast done," she said. "We only gave
thee love, and we are very young, and all our days were happiness. By
cruelty and treachery thou hast brought our childhood to an end, yet
is our doom less piteous than thine. Woe, woe unto thee, O Eva, for a
fearful doom lies before thee!"

Then she asked--a child still, longing to know when the dreary days of
its banishment from other children should be over--"Tell us how long a
time must pass until we can take our own forms again."

[Illustration: ONE TOUCH FOR EACH, WITH A MAGICAL WAND OF THE DRUIDS]

And, relentlessly, Eva made answer: "Better had it been for thy peace
hadst thou left unsought that knowledge. Yet will I tell thee thy
doom. Three hundred years shall ye live in the smooth waters of Lake
Darvra; three hundred years on the Sea of Moyle,[11] which is
between Erin and Alba; three hundred years more at Ivros Domnann[12]
and at Inis Glora,[13] on the Western Sea. Until a prince from the
north shall marry a princess from the south; until the Tailleken (St.
Patrick) shall come to Erin, and until ye shall hear the sound of the
Christian bell, neither my power nor thy power, nor the power of any
Druid's runes can set ye free until that weird is dreed."

As she spoke, a strange softening came into the evil woman's heart.
They were so still, those white creatures who gazed up at her with
eager, beseeching eyes, through which looked the souls of the little
children that once she had loved. They were so silent and piteous, the
little Ficra and Conn, whose dimpled baby faces she often used to
kiss. And she said, that her burden of guilt might be the lighter:

"This relief shall ye have in your troubles. Though ye keep your human
reason and your human speech, yet shall ye suffer no grief because
your form is the form of swans, and you shall sing songs more sweet
than any music that the earth has ever known."

Then Eva went back to her chariot and drove to the palace of her
foster-father at the Great Lake, and the four white swans were left on
the lonely waters of Darvra.

When she reached the palace without the children, the king asked in
disappointment why she had not brought them with her.

"L√Ær loves thee no longer," she made answer. "He will not trust his
children to thee, lest thou shouldst work them some ill."

But her father did not believe her lying words. Speedily he sent
messengers to Shee Finnaha that they might bring back the children who
ever carried joy with them. Amazed, L√Ær received the message, and when
he learned that Eva had reached the palace alone, a terrible dread
arose in his heart. In great haste he set out, and as he passed by
Lake Darvra he heard voices singing melodies so sweet and moving that
he was fain, in spite of his fears, to stop and listen. And lo, as he
listened, he found that the singers were four swans, that swam close
up to where he stood, and greeted him in the glad voices of his own
dear children. All that night he stayed beside them, and when they had
told him their piteous tale and he knew that no power could free them
till the years of their doom were accomplished, L√Ær's heart was like
to break with pitying love and infinite sorrow. At dawn he took a
tender leave of them and drove to the house of Bodb the Red. Terrible
were the words of L√Ær, and dark was his face as he told the king the
evil thing that Eva had done. And Eva, who had thought in the madness
of her jealousy that L√Ær would give her all his love when he was a
childless man, shrank, white and trembling, away from him when she saw
the furious hatred in his eyes. Then said the king, and his anger was
even as the anger of L√Ær:

"The suffering of the little children who are dear to our souls shall
come to an end at last. Thine shall be an eternal doom."

And he put her on oath to tell him "what shape of all others, on the
earth, or above the earth, or beneath the earth, she most abhorred,
and into which she most dreaded to be transformed."

"A demon of the air," answered the cowering woman.

"A demon of the air shalt thou be until time shall cease!" said her
foster-father. Thereupon he smote her with his druidical wand, and a
creature too hideous for men's eyes to look upon, gave a great scream
of anguish, and flapped its black wings as it flew away to join the
other demons of the air.

Then the king of the Dedannans and all his people went with L√Ær to
Lake Darvra, and listened to the honey-sweet melodies that were sung
to them by the white swans that had been the children of their hearts.
And such magic was in the music that it could lull away all sorrow and
pain, and give rest to the grief-stricken and sleep to the toil-worn
and the heavy at heart. And the Dedannans made a great encampment on
the shores of the lake that they might never be far from them. There,
too, as the centuries went by, came the Milesians, who succeeded the
Dedannans in Erin, and so for the children of L√Ær three hundred years
passed happily away.

Sad for them and for L√Ær, and for all the people of the Dedannans, was
the day when the years at Darvra were ended and the four swans said
farewell to their father and to all who were so dear to them, spread
their snowy pinions, and took flight for the stormy sea. They sang a
song of parting that made grief sit heavy on the hearts of all those
who listened, and the men of Erin, in memory of the children of L√Ær
and of the good things they had wrought by the magic of their music,
made a law, and proclaimed it throughout all the land, that from that
time forth no man of their land should harm a swan.

Weary were the great white wings of the children of L√Ær when they
reached the jagged rocks by the side of the fierce grey sea of Moyle,
whose turbulent waves fought angrily together. And the days that came
to them there were days of weariness, of loneliness, and of hardship.
Very cold were they often, very hungry, and yet the sweetness of their
song pierced through the vicious shriek of the tempest and the sullen
boom and crash of the great billows that flung themselves against the
cliffs or thundered in devouring majesty over the wrack-strewn shore,
like a thread of silver that runs through a pall. One night a tempest
drove across and down the Sea of Moyle from the north-east, and lashed
it into fury. And the mirk darkness and the sleet that drove in the
teeth of the gale like bullets of ice, and the huge, irresistible
breakers that threshed the shore, filled the hearts of the children of
L√Ær with dread. For always they had desired love and beauty, and the
ugliness of unrestrained cruelty and fury made them sick at soul.

To her brothers Finola said: "Beloved ones, of a surety the storm must
drive us apart. Let us, then, appoint a place of meeting, lest we
never look upon each other again."

And, knowing that she spoke wisely and well, the three brothers
appointed as their meeting-place the rock of Carricknarone.

Never did a fiercer storm rage on the sea between Alba and Erin than
the storm that raged that night. Thunderous, murky clouds blotted out
stars and moon, nor was there any dividing line between sky and sea,
but both churned themselves up together in a passion of destruction.
When the lightning flashed, it showed only the fury of the cruel seas,
the shattered victims of the destroying storm. Very soon the swans
were driven one from another and scattered over the face of the angry
deep. Scarcely could their souls cling to their bodies while they
struggled with the winds and waves. When the long, long night came to
an end, in the grey and cheerless dawn Finola swam to the rock of
Carricknarone. But no swans were there, only the greedy gulls that
sought after wreckage, and the terns that cried very dolorously.

Then great grief came upon Finola, for she feared she would see her
brothers nevermore. But first of all came Conn, his feathers all
battered and broken and his head drooping, and in a little Ficra
appeared, so drenched and cold and beaten by the winds that no word
could he speak. And Finola took her younger brothers under her great
white wings, and they were comforted and rested in that warm shelter.

"If Aed would only come," she said, "then should we be happy indeed."

And even as she spoke, they beheld Aed sailing towards them like a
proud ship with its white sails shining in the sun, and Finola held
him close to the snowy plumage of her breast, and happiness returned
to the children of L√Ær.

Many another tempest had they to strive with, and very cruel to them
were the snow and biting frosts of the dreary winters. One January
night there came a frost that turned even the restless sea into solid
ice, and in the morning, when the swans strove to rise from the rock
of Carricknarone, the iron frost clung to them and they left behind
them the skin of their feet, the quills of their wings, and the soft
feathers of their breasts, and when the frost had gone, the salt water
was torture for their wounds. Yet ever they sang their songs, piercing
sweet and speaking of the peace and joy to come, and many a
storm-tossed mariner by them was lulled to sleep and dreamt the happy
dreams of his childhood, nor knew who had sung him so magical a
lullaby. It was in those years that Finola sang the song which a poet
who possessed the wonderful heritage of a perfect comprehension of the
soul of the Gael has put into English words for us.

    "Happy our father L√Ær afar,
    With mead, and songs of love and war:
    The salt brine, and the white foam,
    With these his children have their home.

    In the sweet days of long ago,
    Soft-clad we wandered to and fro:
    But now cold winds of dawn and night
    Pierce deep our feathers thin and light.

               *   *   *   *   *

    Beneath my wings my brothers lie
    When the fierce ice-winds hurtle by;
    On either side and 'neath my breast
    L√Ær's sons have known no other rest."

        Fiona Macleod (William Sharp).

Only once during those dreary three hundred years did the children of
L√Ær see any of their friends. When they saw, riding down to the shore
at the mouth of the Bann on the north coast of Erin, a company in
gallant attire, with glittering arms, and mounted on white horses, the
swans hastened to meet them. And glad were their hearts that day, for
the company was led by two sons of Bodb the Red, who had searched for
the swans along the rocky coast of Erin for many a day, and who
brought them loving greetings from the good king of the Dedannans and
from their father L√Ær.

At length the three hundred years on the Sea of Moyle came to an end,
and the swans flew to Ivros Domnann and the Isle of Glora in the
western sea. And there they had sufferings and hardships to bear that
were even more grievous than those that they had endured on the Sea of
Moyle, and one night the snow that drifted down upon them from the ice
was scourged on by a north-west wind, and there came a moment when the
three brothers felt that they could endure no more.

But Finola said to them:

"It is the great God of truth who made both land and sea who alone can
succour us, for He alone can wholly understand the sorrows of our
hearts. Put your trust in Him, dear brothers, and He will send us
comfort and help."

Then said her brothers: "In Him we put our trust," and from that
moment the Lord of Heaven gave them His help, so that no frost, nor
snow, nor cold, nor tempest, nor any of the creatures of the deep
could work them any harm.

When the nine hundred years of their sorrowful doom had ended, the
children of L√Ær joyously spread their wings and flew to their father's
home at Shee Finnaha.

But the house was there no more, for L√Ær, their father, was dead. Only
stones, round which grew rank grass and nettles, and where no human
creature had his habitation, marked the place for which they had
longed with an aching, hungry longing, through all their weary years
of doom. Their cries were piteous as the cries of lost children as
they looked on the desolate ruins, but all night they stayed there,
and their songs were songs that might have made the very stones shed
tears.

Next day they winged their way back to Inis Glora, and there the
sweetness of their singing drew so many birds to listen that the
little lake got the name of the Lake of the Bird-Flocks. Near and far,
for long thereafter, flew the swans, all along the coast of the
Western Sea, and at the island of Iniskea they held converse with the
lonely crane that has lived there since the beginning of the world,
and which will live there until time is no more.

And while the years went by, there came to Erin one who brought glad
tidings, for the holy Patrick came to lead men out of darkness into
light. With him came Kemoc, and Kemoc made his home on Inis Glora.

At dawn one morning, the four swans were roused by the tinkle of a
little bell. It was so far away that it rang faintly, but it was like
no sound they had ever known, and the three brothers were filled with
fear and flew hither and thither, trying to discover from whence the
strange sound came. But when they returned to Finola, they found her
floating at peace on the water.

"Dost not know what sound it is?" she asked, divining their thoughts.

"We heard a faint, fearful voice," they said, "but we know not what it
is."

Then said Finola: "It is the voice of the Christian bell. Soon, now,
shall our suffering be ended, for such is the will of God."

So very happily and peacefully they listened to the ringing of the
bell, until Kemoc had said matins. Then said Finola: "Let us now sing
our music," and they praised the Lord of heaven and earth.

And when the wonderful melody of their song reached the ears of Kemoc,
he knew that none but the children of L√Ær could make such magic-sweet
melody. So he hastened to where they were, and when he asked them if
they were indeed the children of L√Ær, for whose sake he had come to
Inis Glora, they told him all their piteous tale.

Then said Kemoc, "Come then to land, and put your trust in me, for on
this island shall your enchantment come to an end." And when most
gladly they came, he caused a cunning workman to fashion two slender
silver chains; one he put between Finola and Aed, and the other
between Ficra and Conn, and so joyous were they to know again human
love, and so happy to join each day with Kemoc in praising God, that
the memory of their suffering and sorrow lost all its bitterness. Thus
in part were the words of Eva fulfilled, but there had yet to take
place the entire fulfilment of her words.

Decca, a princess of Munster, had wed Larguen, king of Connaught, and
when news came to her of the wonderful swans of Kemoc, nothing would
suffice her but that she should have them for her own. By constant
beseeching, she at length prevailed upon Larguen to send messengers to
Kemoc, demanding the swans. When the messengers returned with a stern
refusal from Kemoc, the king was angry indeed. How dared a mere cleric
refuse to gratify the whim of the queen of Larguen of Connaught! To
Inis Glora he went, posthaste, himself.

"Is it truth that ye have dared to refuse a gift of your birds to my
queen?" he asked, in wrath.

And Kemoc answered: "It is truth."

Then Larguen, in furious anger, seized hold of the silver chain that
bound Finola and Aed together, and of the chain by which Conn and
Ficra were bound, and dragged them away from the altar by which they
sat, that he might take them to his queen.

But as the king held their chains in his rude grasp, a wondrous thing
took place.

Instead of swans, there followed Larguen a very old woman,
white-haired and feeble, and three very old men, bony and wrinkled
and grey. And when Larguen beheld them, terror came upon him and he
hastened homeward, followed by the bitter denunciations of Kemoc. Then
the children of L√Ær, in human form at last, turned to Kemoc and
besought him to baptize them, because they knew that death was very
near.

"Thou art not more sorrowful at parting from us than we are to part
with you, dear Kemoc," they said. And Finola said, "Bury us, I pray
you, together."

    "As oft in life my brothers dear
      Were sooth'd by me to rest--
    Ficra and Conn beneath my wings,
      And Aed before my breast;

    So place the two on either hand--
      Close, like the love that bound me;
    Place Aed as close before my face,
      And twine their arms around me."

        Joyce.

So Kemoc signed them in Holy Baptism with the blessed Cross, and even
as the water touched their foreheads, and while his words were in
their ears, death took them. And, as they passed, Kemoc looked up,
and, behold, four beautiful children, their faces radiant with joy,
and with white wings lined with silver, flying upwards to the clouds.
And soon they vanished from his sight and he saw them no more.

He buried them as Finola had wished, and raised a mound over them, and
carved their names on a stone.

And over it he sang a lament and prayed to the God of all love and
purity, a prayer for the pure and loving souls of those who had been
the children of L√Ær.


FOOTNOTES:

[11] The North Channel.

[12] Erris, in Mayo.

[13] A small island off Benmullet.




DEIRDR√ä

    "Her beauty filled the old world of the Gael with a
    sweet, wonderful, and abiding rumour. The name of
    Deirdr√™ has been as a harp to a thousand poets. In a
    land of heroes and brave and beautiful women, how shall
    one name survive? Yet to this day and for ever, men will
    remember Deirdr√™...."

        Fiona Macleod.


So long ago, that it was before the birth of our Lord, so says
tradition, there was born that

          "Morning star of loveliness,
    Unhappy Helen of a Western land,"

who is known to the Celts of Scotland as Darthool, to those of Ireland
as Deirdr√™. As in the story of Helen, it is not easy, or even possible
in the story of Deirdr√™, to disentangle the old, old facts of actual
history from the web of romantic fairy tale that time has woven about
them, yet so great is the power of Deirdr√™, even unto this day, that
it has been the fond task of those men and women to whom the Gael owes
so much, to preserve, and to translate for posterity, the tragic
romance of Deirdr√™ the Beautiful and the Sons of Usna.

In many ancient manuscripts we get the story in more or less complete
form. In the Advocates' Library of Edinburgh, in the Glenmasan MS. we
get the best and the fullest version, while the oldest and the
shortest is to be found in the twelfth-century _Book of Leinster_.

But those who would revel in the old tale and have Deirdr√™ lead them
by the hand into the enchanted realm of the romance of misty, ancient
days of our Western Isles must go for help to Fiona Macleod, to
Alexander Carmichael, to Lady Gregory, to Dr. Douglas Hyde, to W. F.
Skene, to W. B. Yeats, to J. M. Synge, and to those others who, like
true descendants of the Druids, possess the power of unlocking the
entrance gates of the Green Islands of the Blest.

Conchubar, or Conor, ruled the kingdom of the Ultonians, now Ulster,
when Deirdr√™ was born in Erin. All the most famous warriors of his
time, heroes whose mighty deeds live on in legend, and whose title was
"The Champions of the Red Branch," he gathered round him, and all
through Erin and Alba rang the fame of the warlike Ultonians.

There came a day when Conor and his champions, gorgeous in their gala
dress of crimson tunic with brooches of inlaid gold and white-hooded
shirt embroidered in red gold, went to a feast in the house of one
called Felim. Felim was a bard, and because not only was his arm in
war strong and swift to strike, but because, in peace, his fingers
could draw the sweetest of music from his harp, he was dear to the
king. As they feasted, Conor beheld a dark shadow of horror and of
grief fall on the face of Cathbad, a Druid who had come in his train,
and saw that his aged eyes were gazing far into the Unseen. Speedily
he bade him tell him what evil thing it was that he saw, and Cathbad
turned to the childless Felim and told him that to his wife there was
about to be born a daughter, with eyes like stars that are mirrored
by night in the water, with lips red as the rowan berries and teeth
more white than pearls; with a voice more sweet than the music of
fairy harps. "A maiden fair, tall, long haired, for whom champions
will contend ... and mighty kings be envious of her lovely, faultless
form." For her sweet sake, he said, more blood should be spilt in Erin
than for generations and ages past, and many heroes and bright torches
of the Gaels should lose their lives. For love of her, three heroes of
eternal renown must give their lives away, the sea in which her starry
eyes should mirror themselves would be a sea of blood, and woe
unutterable should come on the sons of Erin. Then up spoke the lords
of the Red Branch, and grimly they looked at Felim the Harper:

"If the babe that thy wife is about to bear is to bring such evil upon
our land, better that thou shouldst shed her innocent blood ere she
spills the blood of our nation."

And Felim made answer:

"It is well spoken. Bitter it is for my wife and for me to lose a
child so beautiful, yet shall I slay her that my land may be saved
from such a doom."

But Conor, the king, spoke then, and because the witchery of the
perfect beauty and the magic charm of Deirdr√™ was felt by him even
before she was born, he said: "She shall not die. Upon myself I take
the doom. The child shall be kept apart from all men until she is of
an age to wed. Then shall I take her for my wife, and none shall dare
to contend for her."

His voice had barely ceased, when a messenger came to Felim to tell
him that a daughter was born to him, and on his heels came a
procession of chanting women, bearing the babe on a flower-decked
cushion. And all who saw the tiny thing, with milk-white skin, and
locks "more yellow than the western gold of the summer sun," looked on
her with the fear that even the bravest heart feels on facing the
Unknown. And Cathbad spoke: "Let Deirdr√™ be her name, sweet menace
that she is." And the babe gazed up with starry eyes at the
white-haired Druid as he chanted to her:

    "_Many will be jealous of your face, O flame of beauty;
    for your sake heroes shall go to exile. For there is
    harm in your face; it will bring banishment and death on
    the sons of kings. In your fate, O beautiful child, are
    wounds and ill-doings, and shedding of blood._

    "_You will have a little grave apart to yourself; you
    will be a tale of wonder for ever, Deirdr√™._"

        Lady Gregory's Translation.

As Conor commanded, Deirdr√™, the little "babe of destiny," was left
with her mother for only a month and a day, and then was sent with a
nurse and with Cathbad the Druid to a lonely island, thickly wooded,
and only accessible by a sort of causeway at low tide. Here she grew
into maidenhood, and each day became more fair. She had instruction
from Cathbad in religion and in all manner of wisdom, and it would
seem as though she also learned from him some of that mystical power
that enabled her to see things hidden from human eyes.

"Tell me," one day she asked her teacher, "who made the stars, the
firmament above, the earth, the flowers, both thee and me?"

And Cathbad answered: "God. But who God is, alas! no man can say."

Then Deirdr√™, an impetuous child, seized the druidical staff from the
hand of Cathbad, broke it in two, and flung the pieces far out on the
water. "Ah, Cathbad!" she cried, "there shall come One in the dim
future for whom all your Druid spells and charms are naught."

Then seeing Cathbad hang his head, and a tear trickle down his face,
for he knew that the child spoke truth, the child, grieved at giving
pain to the friend whom she loved, threw her arms about the old man's
neck, and by her kisses strove to comfort him.

As Deirdr√™ grew older, Conor sent one from his court to educate her in
all that any queen should know. They called her the Lavarcam, which,
in our tongue, really means the Gossip, and she was one of royal blood
who belonged to a class that in those days had been trained to be
chroniclers, or story-tellers. The Lavarcam was a clever woman, and
she marvelled at the wondrous beauty of the child she came to teach,
and at her equally marvellous mind.

One winter day, when the snow lay deep, it came to pass that Deirdr√™
saw lying on the snow a calf that had been slain for her food. The red
blood that ran from its neck had brought a black raven swooping down
upon the snow. And to Lavarcam Deirdr√™ said: "If there were a man who
had hair of the blackness of that raven, skin of the whiteness of the
snow, and cheeks as red as the blood that stains its whiteness, to him
should I give my heart."

And Lavarcam, without thought, made answer:

"One I know whose skin is whiter than the snow, whose cheeks are ruddy
as the blood that stained the snow, and whose hair is black and glossy
as the raven's wing. He has eyes of the darkest blue of the sky, and
head and shoulders is he above all the men of Erin."

"And what will be the name of that man, Lavarcam?" asked Deirdr√™. "And
whence is he, and what his degree?"

And Lavarcam made answer that he of whom she spoke was Naoise, one of
the three sons of Usna, a great lord of Alba, and that these three
sons were mighty champions who had been trained at the famed military
school at Sgathaig[14] in the Isle of Skye.

Then said Deirdr√™: "My love shall be given to none but Naoise, son of
Usna. To him shall it belong forever."

From that day forward, Naoise held kingship over the thoughts and
dreams of Deirdr√™.

And when Lavarcam saw how deep her careless words had sunk into the
heart of the maiden, she grew afraid, and tried to think of a means by
which to undo the harm which, in her thoughtlessness, she had wrought.

Now Conor had made a law that none but Cathbad, Lavarcam, and the
nurse of Deirdr√™ should pass through the forest that led to her
hiding-place, and that none but they should look upon her until his
own eyes beheld her and he took her for his wife. But as Lavarcam one
day came from seeing Deirdr√™, and from listening to her many eager
questions about Naoise, she met a swineherd, rough in looks and
speech, and clad in the pelt of a deer, and with him two rough
fellows, bondmen of the Ultonians, and to her quick mind there came a
plan. Thus she bade them follow her into the forbidden forest and
there to remain, by the side of a well, until they should hear the
bark of a fox and the cry of a jay. Then they were to walk slowly on
through the woods, speaking to none whom they might meet, and still
keeping silence when they were again out of the shadow of the trees.

Then Lavarcam sped back to Deirdr√™ and begged her to come with her to
enjoy the beauty of the woods. In a little, Lavarcam strayed away from
her charge, and soon the cry of a jay and the bark of a fox were
heard, and while Deirdr√™ still marvelled at the sounds that came so
close together, Lavarcam returned. Nor had she been back a minute
before three men came through the trees and slowly walked past, close
to where Lavarcam and Deirdr√™ were hidden.

"I have never seen men so near before," said Deirdr√™. "Only from the
outskirts of the forest have I seen them very far away. Who are these
men, who bring no joy to my eyes?"

And Lavarcam made answer: "These are Naoise, Ardan, and Ainle--the
three sons of Usna."

But Deirdr√™ looked hard at Lavarcam, and scorn and laughter were in
her merry eyes.

"Then shall I have speech with Naoise, Ardan, and Ainle," she said,
and ere Lavarcam could stop her, she had flitted through the trees by
a path amongst the fern, and stood suddenly before the three men.

And the rough hinds, seeing such perfect loveliness, made very sure
that Deirdr√™ was one of the _sidhe_[15] and stared at her with the
round eyes and gaping mouths of wondering terror.

For a moment Deirdr√™ gazed at them. Then: "Are ye the Sons of Usna?"
she asked.

And when they stood like stocks, frightened and stupid, she lashed
them with her mockery, until the swineherd could no more, and blurted
out the whole truth to this most beautiful of all the world. Then,
very gently, like pearls from a silver string, the words fell from the
rowan-red lips of Deirdr√™: "I blame thee not, poor swineherd," she
said, "and that thou mayst know that I deem thee a true man, I would
fain ask thee to do one thing for me."

And when the eyes of the herd met the eyes of Deirdr√™, a soul was born
in him, and he knew things of which he never before had dreamed.

"If I can do one thing to please thee, that will I do," he said. "Aye,
and gladly pay for it with my life. Thenceforth my life is thine."

And Deirdr√™ said: "I would fain see Naoise, one of the Sons of Usna."

And once more the swineherd said: "My life is thine."

Then Deirdr√™, seeing in his eyes a very beautiful thing, stooped and
kissed the swineherd on his weather-beaten, tanned forehead.

"Go, then," she said, "to Naoise. Tell him that I, Deirdr√™, dream of
him all the night and think of him all the day, and that I bid him
meet me here to-morrow an hour before the setting of the sun."

The swineherd watched her flit into the shadows of the trees, and then
went on his way, through the snowy woods, that he might pay with his
life for the kiss that Deirdr√™ had given him.

Sorely puzzled was Lavarcam over the doings of Deirdr√™ that day, for
Deirdr√™ told her not a word of what had passed between her and the
swineherd. On the morrow, when she left her to go back to the court of
King Conor, she saw, as she drew near Emain Macha, where he stayed,
black wings that flapped over something that lay on the snow. At her
approach there rose three ravens, three kites, and three hoodie-crows,
and she saw that their prey was the body of the swineherd with gaping
spear-wounds all over him. Yet even then he looked happy. He had died
laughing, and there was still a smile on his lips. Faithfully had he
delivered his message, and when he had spoken of the beauty of
Deirdr√™, rumour of his speech had reached the king, and the spears of
Conor's men had enabled him to make true the words he had said to
Deirdr√™: "I will pay for it with my life." In this way was shed the
first blood of that great sea of blood that was spilt for the love of
Deirdr√™, the Beauty of the World.

From where the swineherd lay, Lavarcam went to the camp of the Sons
of Usna, and to Naoise she told the story of the love that Deirdr√™
bore him, and counselled him to come to the place where she was
hidden, and behold her beauty. And Naoise, who had seen how even a
rough clod of a hind could achieve the noble chivalry of a race of
kings for her dear sake, felt his heart throb within him. "I will
come," he said to Lavarcam.

Days passed, and Deirdr√™ waited, very sure that Naoise must come to
her at last. And one day she heard a song of magical sweetness coming
through the trees. Three voices sung the song, and it was as though
one of the _sidhe_ played a harp to cast a spell upon men. The voice
of Ainle, youngest of the Sons of Usna, was like the sweet upper
strings of the harp, that of Ardan the strings in the middle, and the
voice of Naoise was like the strings whose deep resonance can play
upon the hearts of warriors and move them to tears. Then Deirdr√™ knew
that she heard the voice of her beloved, and she sped to him as a bird
speeds to her mate. Even as Lavarcam had told her was Naoise, eldest
of the Sons of Usna, but no words had been able to tell Naoise of the
beauty of Deirdr√™.

    "It was as though a sudden flood of sunshine burst forth
    in that place. For a woman came from the thicket more
    beautiful than any dream he had ever dreamed. She was
    clad in a saffron robe over white that was like the
    shining of the sun on foam of the sea, and this was
    claspt with great bands of yellow gold, and over her
    shoulders was the rippling flood of her hair, the sprays
    of which lightened into delicate fire, and made a mist
    before him, in the which he could see her eyes like two
    blue pools wherein purple shadows dreamed."

        Fiona Macleod.

From that moment Naoise "gave his love to Deirdr√™ above every other
creature," and their souls rushed together and were one for evermore.
It was for them the beginning of a perfect love, and so sure were they
of that love from the very first moment that it seemed as though they
must have been born loving one another.

Of that love they talked, of the anger of Conor when he knew that his
destined bride was the love of Naoise, and together they planned how
it was best for Deirdr√™ to escape from the furious wrath of the king
who desired her for his own.

Of a sudden, the hands of Naoise gripped the iron-pointed javelin that
hung by his side, and drove it into a place where the snow weighed
down the bracken.

"Is it a wolf?" cried Deirdr√™.

And Naoise made answer: "Either a dead man, or the mark of where a man
has lain hidden thou wilt find under the bracken."

And when they went to look they found, like the clap of a hare, the
mark of where a man had lain hidden, and close beside the javelin that
was driven in the ground there lay a wooden-hilted knife.

Then said Naoise: "Well I knew that Conor would set a spy on my
tracks. Come with me now, Deirdr√™, else may I lose thee forever."

And with a glad heart Deirdr√™ went with him who was to be her lord,
and Naoise took her to where his brothers awaited his coming. To
Deirdr√™, both Ainle and Ardan swiftly gave their lifelong allegiance
and their love, but they were full of forebodings for her and for
Naoise because of the certain wrath of Conor, the king.

Then said Naoise: "Although harm should come, for her dear sake I am
willing to live in disgrace for the rest of my days."

And Ardan and Ainle made answer: "Of a certainty, evil will be of it,
yet though there be, thou shalt not be under disgrace as long as we
shall be alive. We will go with her to another country. There is not
in Erin a king who will not bid us welcome."

Then did the Sons of Usna decide to cross the Sea of Moyle, and in
their own land of Alba to find a happy sanctuary. That night they
fled, and with them took three times fifty men, three times fifty
women, three times fifty horses, and three times fifty greyhounds. And
when they looked back to where they had had their dwelling, they saw
red flames against the deep blue sky of the night, and knew that the
vengeance of Conor had already begun. And first they travelled round
Erin from Essa to Beinn Etair,[16] and then in a great black galley
they set sail, and Deirdr√™ had a heart light as the white-winged
sea-birds as the men pulled at the long oars and sang together a
rowing song, and she leaned on the strong arm of Naoise and saw the
blue coast-line of Erin fading into nothingness.

In the bay of Aros, on the eastern shores of the island of Mull, they
found their first resting-place, but there they feared treachery from
a lord of Appin. For the starry eyes of Deirdr√™ were swift to discern
evil that the eyes of the Sons of Usna could not see. Thus they fared
onward until they reached the great sea-loch of Etive, with hills
around it, and Ben Cruachan, its head in mist, towering above it like
a watchman placed there by Time, to wait and to watch over the people
of those silent hills and lonely glens until Time should give place to
his brother, Eternity.

Joy was in the hearts of the three Sons of Usna when they came back to
the home of their fathers. Usna was dead, but beyond the Falls of Lora
was still the great dun--the vitrified fort--which he had built for
himself and for those who should follow him.

For Deirdr√™ then began a time of perfect happiness. Naoise was her
heart, but very dear to her also were the brothers of Naoise, and each
of the three vied with one another in their acts of tender and loving
service. Their thrice fifty vassals had no love for Alba, and rejoiced
when their lord, Naoise, allowed them to return to Erin, but the Sons
of Usna were glad to have none to come between them and their serving
of Deirdr√™, the queen of their hearts. Soon she came to know well each
little bay, each beach, and each little lonely glen of Loch Etive, for
the Sons of Usna did not always stay at the dun which had been their
father's, but went a-hunting up the loch. At various spots on the
shores of Etive they had camping places, and at Dail-an-eas[17] they
built for Deirdr√™ a sunny bower.

On a sloping bank above the waterfall they built the little nest,
thatched with the royal fern of the mountains, the red clay of the
pools, and with soft feathers from the breasts of birds. There she
could sit and listen to the murmur and drip of the clear water over
the mossy boulders, the splash of the salmon in the dark pools, and
see the distant silver of the loch. When the summer sun was hot on the
bog myrtle and heather, the hum of the wild bees would lull her to
sleep, and in autumn, when the bracken grew red and golden and the
rowan berries grew red as Deirdr√™'s lips, her keen eyes would see the
stags grazing high up among the grey boulders of the mist-crowned
mountains, and would warn the brothers of the sport awaiting them. The
crow of the grouse, the belling of stags, the bark of the hill-fox,
the swish of the great wings of the golden eagle, the song of birds,
the lilt of running water, the complaining of the wind through the
birches--all these things made music to Deirdr√™, to whom all things
were dear.

"_Is tu mein na Dearshul agha_"--"The tenderness of heartsweet
Deirdr√™"--so runs a line in an old, old Gaelic verse, and it is always
of her tenderness as well as her beauty that the old _Oea_ speak.

Sometimes she would hunt the red deer with Naoise and his brothers, up
the lonely glens, up through the clouds to the silent mountain tops,
and in the evening, when she was weary, her three loyal worshippers
would proudly bear her home upon their bucklers.

So the happy days passed away, and in Erin the angry heart of Conor
grew yet more angry when tidings came to him of the happiness of
Deirdr√™ and the Sons of Usna. Rumour came to him that the king of
Alba had planned to come against Naoise, to slay him, and to take
Deirdr√™ for his wife, but that ere he could come the Sons of Usna and
Deirdr√™ had sailed yet further north in their galley, and that there,
in the land of his mother, Naoise ruled as a king. And not only on
Loch Etive, but on Loch Awe and Loch Fyne, Loch Striven, Loch Ard,
Loch Long, Loch Lomond and all along the sea-loch coast, the fame of
the Sons of Usna spread, and the wonder of the beauty of Deirdr√™,
fairest of women.

And ever the hatred of Conor grew, until one day there came into his
mind a plan of evil by which his burning thirst for revenge might be
handsomely assuaged.

He made, therefore, a great feast, at which all the heroes of the Red
Branch were present. When he had done them every honour, he asked them
if they were content. As one man: "Well content indeed!" answered
they.

"And that is what I am not," said the king. Then with the guile of
fair words he told them that to him it was great sorrow that the three
heroes, with whose deeds the Western Isles and the whole of the north
and west of Alba were ringing, should not be numbered amongst his
friends, sit at his board in peace and amity, and fight for the
Ultonians like all the other heroes of the Red Branch.

"They took from me the one who would have been my wife," he said, "yet
even that I can forgive, and if they would return to Erin, glad would
my welcome be."

At these words there was great rejoicing amongst the lords of the Red
Branch and all those who listened, and Conor, glad at heart, said,
"My three best champions shall go to bring them back from their
exile," and he named Conall the Victorious, Cuchulainn, and Fergus,
the son of Rossa the Red. Then secretly he called Conall to him and
asked him what he would do if he were sent to fetch the Sons of Usna,
and, in spite of his safe-conduct, they were slain when they reached
the land of the Ultonians. And Conall made answer that should such a
shameful thing come to pass he would slay with his own hand all the
traitor dogs. Then he sent for Cuchulainn, and to him put the same
question, and, in angry scorn, the young hero replied that even Conor
himself would not be safe from his vengeance were such a deed of black
treachery to be performed.

"Well did I know thou didst bear me no love," said Conor, and black
was his brow.

He called for Fergus then, and Fergus, sore troubled, made answer that
were there to be such a betrayal, the king alone would be held sacred
from his vengeance.

Then Conor gladly gave Fergus command to go to Alba as his emissary,
and to fetch back with him the three brothers and Deirdr√™ the
Beautiful.

"Thy name of old was Honeymouth," he said, "so I know well that with
guile thou canst bring them to Erin. And when thou shalt have returned
with them, send them forward, but stay thyself at the house of
Borrach. Borrach shall have warning of thy coming."

This he said, because to Fergus and to all the other of the Red
Branch, a _geasa_, or pledge, was sacrosanct. And well he knew that
Fergus had as one of his _geasa_ that he would never refuse an
invitation to a feast.

Next day Fergus and his two sons, Illann the Fair and Buinne the Red,
set out in their galley for the dun of the Sons of Usna on Loch Etive.

The day before their hurried flight from Erin, Ainle and Ardan had
been playing chess in their dun with Conor, the king. The board was of
fair ivory, and the chessmen were of red-gold, wrought in strange
devices. It had come from the mysterious East in years far beyond the
memory of any living man, and was one of the dearest of Conor's
possessions. Thus, when Ainle and Ardan carried off the chess-board
with them in their flight, after the loss of Deirdr√™, that was the
loss that gave the king the greatest bitterness. Now it came to pass
that as Naoise and Deirdr√™ were sitting in front of their dun, the
little waves of Loch Etive lapping up on the seaweed, yellow as the
hair of Deirdr√™, far below, and playing chess at this board, they
heard a shout from the woods down by the shore where the hazels and
birches grew thick.

"That is the voice of a man of Erin!" said Naoise, and stopped in his
game to listen.

But Deirdr√™ said, very quickly: "Not so! It is the voice of a Gael of
Alba."

Yet so she spoke that she might try to deceive her own heart, that
even then was chilled by the black shadow of an approaching evil. Then
came another shout, and yet a third. And when they heard the third
shout, there was no doubt left in their minds, for they all knew the
voice for that of Fergus, the son of Rossa the Red. And when Ardan
hastened down to the harbour to greet him, Deirdr√™ confessed to Naoise
why she had refused at first to own that it was a voice from Erin that
she heard.

"I saw in a dream last night," she said, "three birds that flew hither
from Emain Macha, carrying three sips of honey in their beaks. The
honey they left with us, but took away three sips of blood."

And Naoise said: "What then, best beloved, dost thou read from this
dream of thine?"

And Deirdr√™ said: "I read that Fergus comes from Conor with honeyed
words of peace, but behind his treacherous words lies death."

As they spake, Ardan and Fergus and his following climbed up the
height where the bog-myrtle and the heather and sweet fern yielded
their sweetest incense as they were wounded under their firm tread.

And when Fergus stood before Deirdr√™ and Naoise, the man of her heart,
he told them of Conor's message, and of the peace and the glory that
awaited them in Erin if they would but listen to the words of welcome
that he brought.

Then said Naoise: "I am ready." But his eyes dared not meet the
sea-blue eyes of Deirdr√™, his queen.

"Knowest thou that my pledge is one of honour?" asked Fergus.

"I know it well," said Naoise.

So in joyous feasting was that night spent, and only over the heart
of Deirdr√™ hung that black cloud of sorrow to come, of woe
unspeakable.

When the golden dawn crept over the blue hills of Loch Etive, and the
white-winged birds of the sea swooped and dived and cried in the
silver waters, the galley of the Sons of Usna set out to sea.

And Deirdr√™, over whom hung a doom she had not the courage to name,
sang a song at parting:

THE LAY OF DEIRDRE

    "Beloved land, that Eastern land,
    Alba, with its wonders.
    O that I might not depart from it,
    But that I go with Naoise.

    Beloved is Dunfidgha and Dun Fin;
    Beloved the Dun above them;
    Beloved is Innisdraighende;[18]
    And beloved Dun Suibhne.[19]

    Coillchuan! O Coillchuan!
    Where Ainnle would, alas! resort;
    Too short, I deem, was then my stay
    With Ainnle in Oirir Alban.

    Glenlaidhe![20] O Glenlaidhe!
    I used to sleep by its soothing murmur;
    Fish, and flesh of wild boar and badger,
    Was my repast in Glenlaidhe.

    Glenmasan! O Glenmasan![21]
    High its herbs, fair its boughs.
    Solitary was the place of our repose
    On grassy Invermasan.

    Gleneitche![22] O Gleneitche!
    There was raised my earliest home.
    Beautiful its woods on rising,
    When the sun struck on Gleneitche.

    Glen Urchain![23] O Glen Urchain!
    It was the straight glen of smooth ridges,
    Not more joyful was a man of his age
    Than Naoise in Glen Urchain.

    Glendaruadh![24] O Glendaruadh!
    My love each man of its inheritance.
    Sweet the voice of the cuckoo, on bending bough,
    On the hill above Glendaruadh.

    Beloved is Draighen and its sounding shore;
    Beloved is the water o'er the pure sand.
    O that I might not depart from the east,
    But that I go with my beloved!"

        _Translated by W. F. Skene, LL.D._

Thus they fared across the grey-green sea betwixt Alba and Erin, and
when Ardan and Ainle and Naoise heard the words of the song of
Deirdr√™, on their hearts also descended the strange sorrow of an evil
thing from which no courage could save them.

At Ballycastle, opposite Rathlin Island, where a rock on the shore
("Carraig Uisneach") still bears the name of the Sons of Usna, Fergus
and the returned exiles landed. And scarcely were they out of sight of
the shore when a messenger came to Fergus, bidding him to a feast of
ale at the dun of Borrach. Then Fergus, knowing well that in this was
the hand of Conor and that treachery was meant, reddened all over with
anger and with shame. But yet he dared not break his _geasa_, even
although by holding to it the honour he had pledged to the three
brothers for their safe-conduct and that of Deirdr√™ was dragged
through the mire. He therefore gave them his sons for escort and went
to the feast at the dun of Borrach, full well knowing that Deirdr√™
spoke truth when she told him sadly that he had sold his honour. The
gloomy forebodings that had assailed the heart of Deirdr√™ ere they had
left Loch Etive grew ever the stronger as they went southwards. She
begged Naoise to let them go to some place of safety and there wait
until Fergus had fulfilled his _geasa_ and could rejoin them and go
with them to Emain Macha. But the Sons of Usna, strong in the
knowledge of their own strength, and simply trustful of the pledged
word of Conor and of Fergus, laughed at her fears, and continued on
their way. Dreams of dread portent haunted her sleep, and by daytime
her eyes in her white face looked like violets in the snow. She saw a
cloud of blood always hanging over the beautiful Sons of Usna, and all
of them she saw, and Illann the Fair, with their heads shorn off, gory
and awful. Yet no pleading words could prevail upon Naoise. His fate
drove him on.

"To Emain Macha we must go, my beloved," he said. "To do other than
this would be to show that we have fear, and fear we have none."

Thus at last did they arrive at Emain Macha, and with courteous
welcome Conor sent them word that the house of the heroes of the Red
Branch was to be theirs that night. And although the place the king
had chosen for their lodgment confirmed all the intuitions and
forebodings of Deirdr√™, the evening was spent by in good cheer, and
Deirdr√™ had the joy of a welcome there from her old friend Lavarcam.
For to Lavarcam Conor had said: "I would have thee go to the House of
the Red Branch and bring me back tidings if the beauty of Deirdr√™ has
waned, or if she is still the most beautiful of all women."

And when Lavarcam saw her whom she had loved as a little child,
playing chess with her husband at the board of ivory and gold, she
knew that love had made the beauty of Deirdr√™ blossom, and that she
was now more beautiful than the words of any man or woman could tell.
Nor was it possible for her to be a tool for Conor when she looked in
the starry eyes of Deirdr√™, and so she poured forth warning of the
treachery of Conor, and the Sons of Usna knew that there was truth in
the dreams of her who was the queen of their hearts. And even as
Lavarcam ceased there came to the eyes of Deirdr√™ a vision such as
that of Cathbad the Druid on the night of her birth.

    "I see three torches quenched this night," she said.
    "And these three torches are the Three Torches of Valour
    among the Gael, and their names are the names of the
    Sons of Usna. And more bitter still is this sorrow,
    because that the Red Branch shall ultimately perish
    through it, and Uladh itself be overthrown, and blood
    fall this way and that as the whirled rains of
    winter."

        Fiona Macleod.

Then Lavarcam went her way, and returned to the palace at Emain Macha
and told Conor that the cruel winds and snows of Alba had robbed
Deirdr√™ of all her loveliness, so that she was no more a thing to be
desired. But Naoise had said to Deirdr√™ when she foretold his doom:
"Better to die for thee and for thy deathless beauty than to have
lived without knowledge of thee and thy love," and it may have been
that some memory of the face of Deirdr√™, when she heard these words,
dwelt in the eyes of Lavarcam and put quick suspicion into the evil
heart of the king. For when Lavarcam had gone forth, well pleased that
she had saved her darling, Conor sent a spy--a man whose father and
three brothers had fallen in battle under the sword of Naoise--that he
might see Deirdr√™ and confirm or contradict the report of Lavarcam.
And when this man reached the house of the Red Branch, he found that
the Sons of Usna had been put on their guard, for all the doors and
windows were barred. Thus he climbed to a narrow upper window and
peered in. There, lying on the couches, the chess-board of ivory and
gold between them, were Naoise and Deirdr√™. So beautiful were they,
that they were as the deathless gods, and as they played that last
game of their lives, they spoke together in low voices of love that
sounded like the melody of a harp in the hands of a master player.
Deirdr√™ was the first to see the peering face with the eyes that
gloated on her loveliness. No word said she, but silently made the
gaze of Naoise follow her own, even as he held a golden chessman in
his hand, pondering a move. Swift as a stone from a sling the chessman
was hurled, and the man fell back to the ground with his eyeball
smashed, and found his way to Emain Macha as best he could, shaking
with agony and snarling with lust for revenge. Vividly he painted for
the king the picture of the most beautiful woman on earth as she
played at the chess-board that he held so dear, and the rage of Conor
that had smouldered ever since that day when he learned that Naoise
had stolen Deirdr√™ from him, flamed up into madness. With a bellow
like that of a wounded bull, he called upon the Ultonians to come with
him to the House of the Red Branch, to burn it down, and to slay all
those within it with the sword, save only Deirdr√™, who was to be saved
for a more cruel fate.

In the House of the Red Branch, Deirdr√™ and the three brothers and the
two sons of Fergus heard the shouts of the Ultonians and knew that the
storm was about to break. But, calm as rocks against which the angry
waves beat themselves in vain, sat those whose portion at dawn was to
be cruel death. And Naoise and Ainle played chess, with hands that did
not tremble. At the first onslaught, Buinne the Red, son of Fergus,
sallied forth, quenched the flames, and drove back the Ultonians with
great slaughter. But Conor called to him to parley and offered him a
bribe of land, and Buinne, treacherous son of a treacherous father,
went over to the enemy. His brother, Illann the Fair, filled with
shame, did what he could to make amends. He went forth, and many
hundreds of the besieging army fell before him, ere death stayed his
loyal hand. At his death the Ultonians again fired the house, and
first Ardan and then Ainle left their chess for a fiercer game, and
glutted their sword blades with the blood of their enemies. Last came
the turn of Naoise. He kissed Deirdr√™, and drank a drink, and went out
against the men of Conor, and where his brothers had slain hundreds,
a thousand fell before his sword.

Then fear came into the heart of Conor, for he foresaw that against
the Sons of Usna no man could prevail, save by magic. Thus he sent for
Cathbad the Druid, who was even then very near death, and the old man
was carried on a litter to the House of the Red Branch, from which the
flames were leaping, and before which the dead lay in heaps.

And Conor besought him to help him to subdue the Sons of Usna ere they
should have slain every Ultonian in the land. So by his magic Cathbad
raised a hedge of spears round the house. But Naoise, Ardan, and
Ainle, with Deirdr√™ in their centre, sheltered by their shields, burst
suddenly forth from the blazing house, and cut a way for themselves
through the hedge as though they sheared green wheat. And, laughing
aloud, they took a terrible toll of lives from the Ultonians who would
have withstood them. Then again the Druid put forth his power, and a
noise like the noise of many waters was in the ears of all who were
there. So suddenly the magic flood arose that there was no chance of
escape for the Sons of Usna. Higher it mounted, ever higher, and
Naoise held Deirdr√™ on his shoulder, and smiled up in her eyes as the
water rose past his middle. Then suddenly as it had come, the flood
abated, and all was well with the Ultonians who had sheltered on a
rising ground. But the Sons of Usna found themselves entrapped in a
morass where the water had been. Conor, seeing them in his hands at
last, bade some of his warriors go and take them. But for shame no
Ultonian would go, and it was a man from Norway who walked along a dry
spit of land to where they stood, sunk deep in the green bog. "Slay me
first!" called Ardan as he drew near, sword in hand. "I am the
youngest, and, who knows, my death may change the tides of fate!"

And Ainle also craved that death might be dealt to him the first. But
Naoise held out his own sword, "The Retaliator," to the executioner.

"Mannanan, the son of L√Ær, gave me my good sword," he said. "With it
strike my dear brothers and me one blow only as we stand here like
three trees planted in the soil. Then shall none of us know the grief
and shame of seeing the other beheaded." And because it was hard for
any man to disobey the command of Naoise, a king of men, the Norseman
reached out his hand for the sword. But Deirdr√™ sprang from the
shoulder of Naoise and would have killed the man ere he struck.
Roughly he threw her aside, and with one blow he shore off the heads
of the three greatest heroes of Alba.

For a little while there was a great stillness there, like the silence
before the coming of a storm. And then all who had beheld the end of
the fair and noble Sons of Usna broke into great lamentation. Only
Conor stood silent, gazing at the havoc he had wrought. To Cuchulainn,
the mighty champion, a good man and a true, Deirdr√™ fled, and begged
him to protect her for the little span of life that she knew yet
remained to her. And with him she went to where the head of Naoise
lay, and tenderly she cleansed it from blood and from the stains of
strife and stress, and smoothed the hair that was black as a raven's
wing, and kissed the cold lips again and again. And as she held it
against her white breast, as a mother holds a little child, she
chanted for Naoise, her heart, and for his brothers, a lament that
still lives in the language of the Gael.

    "Is it honour that ye love, brave and chivalrous Ultonians?
    Or is the word of a base king better than noble truth?
    Of a surety ye must be glad, who have basely slain honour
    In slaying the three noblest and best of your brotherhood.

               *   *   *   *   *

    Let now my beauty that set all this warring aflame,
    Let now my beauty be quenched as a torch that is spent--
    For here shall I quench it, here, where my loved one lies,
    A torch shall it be for him still through the darkness of death."

        Fiona Macleod's Translation.

Then, at the bidding of Cuchulainn, the Ultonian, three graves were
dug for the brothers, but the grave of Naoise was made wider than the
others, and when he was placed in it, standing upright, with his head
placed on his shoulders, Deirdr√™ stood by him and held him in her
white arms, and murmured to him of the love that was theirs and of
which not Death itself could rob them. And even as she spoke to him,
merciful Death took her, and together they were buried. At that same
hour a terrible cry was heard: "_The Red Branch perisheth! Uladh
passeth! Uladh passeth!_" and when he had so spoken, the soul of
Cathbad the Druid passed away.

To the land of the Ultonians there came on the morrow a mighty host,
and the Red Branch was wiped out for ever. Emain Macha was cast into
ruins, and Conor died in a madness of sorrow.

And still, in that land of Erin where she died, still in the lonely
cleuchs and glens, and up the mist-hung mountain sides of Loch Etive,
where she knew her truest happiness, we can sometimes almost hear the
wind sighing the lament: "Deirdr√™ the beautiful is dead ... is dead!"

    "I hear a voice crying, crying, crying: is it the wind
    I hear, crying its old weary cry time out of mind?

    _The grey wind weeps, the grey wind weeps, the grey wind weeps:_
    _Dust on her breast, dust on her eyes, the grey wind weeps._"

        Fiona Macleod.


FOOTNOTES:

[14] Now Dunskaith.

[15] Fairies.

[16] The Hill of Howth, at Dublin Bay.

[17] Dale of the Waterfall: now Dalness.

[18] Inistrynich.

[19] Dun Sween.

[20] Glen Lug.

[21] At the head of Holy Loch, Argyllshire.

[22] Glen Etive.

[23] Glenorchy.

[24] Glendaruel.




INDEX


Acheron, 37

Achilles, 71

Acrisius, 105, 121, 122, 123

Adam, 220

Adonis, 178, 192, 202, 203, 205, 206, 207, 208

Advocates' Library, 306

Aed, 290, 299, 300, 304, 305

√Ügean Sea, 36, 90, 106, 121, 145, 146, 186

√Ügean Islands, 172

√Üolus, 144

√Üsculapius, 88

√Üsop, 169

Ainle, 313, 315, 316, 317, 322, 325, 329, 330, 331

Ainnle, 324

Aix, 287

Aix-la-Chapelle, 287

Ajax, 71

Alba, 295, 299, 307, 311, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 325, 327, 331

Alban, Oirir, 324

Alexander the Great, 135

Alpheus, 102, 103, 104

Alth√¶a, 69, 71, 75

Amphion, 124, 128

Anapus, 101

Andromeda, 119, 120, 123

Angelo, Michael, 203

Anglo-Saxon, 245

Angrbotha, 236

Aphrodite, 5, 13, 14, 15, 42, 46, 47, 49, 56, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65,
    66, 67, 79, 81, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206

Apollo, 5, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 27, 28, 29, 32, 42, 43, 44, 45,
    49, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 101, 125, 126, 127, 129, 130,
    131, 132, 133, 139, 140, 141, 142, 145, 164, 165, 173, 185, 186,
    187, 188, 190, 191, 192, 267

Apollo Belvidere, 11

Apollo, Ph≈ìbus, 19

Appin, 317

Arachne, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88, 89

Arcadia, 71, 77, 78, 197, 211

Arcadian, 75

Archilochus, 223

Ard, Loch, 320

Ardan, 312, 315, 316, 317, 322, 323, 325, 329, 330, 331

Arethusa, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104

Argo, 39

Argonauts, 39

Argos, 105, 122, 128

Arist√¶us, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160

Aristophanes, 169

Argyllshire, 324

Arnold, Matthew, 228, 239, 240

Aros, 317

Artemis, 26, 27

Arthur, King, 268

Aschere, 256

Asgard, 230, 231, 235, 239, 240, 242

Asia, 135

Atalanta, 71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 78, 79, 80, 81

Athen√©, Pallas, 3, 4, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111,
    112, 115, 120, 182

Athens, 181, 182

Atlas, 114, 115, 117

Aude the Fair, 282, 287

Aurora, 20, 21

Australia, 220

Awe, Loch, 320


Bacchantes, 40

Bacchus, 40, 136, 138

Baldrsbr√°, 234

Baldur, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243

Ballycastle, 325

Bann, 301

Bartholomew, 88

Bavi√®re, Naismes de, 272

Belvidere, Apollo, 11

Ben Cruachan, 318

Ben Etair, 317

Benmullet, 295

Beowulf, 229, 244, 245, 246, 249, 250, 251, 252, 253, 254, 255, 256,
    257, 258, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 264, 265

Beowulf's Barrow, 264

Beowulfesby, 245

Bertha, 269, 271, 272

Bion, 206

Blancandrin, 268, 274

Blaye, 287

Bodb the Red, 289, 290, 291, 296, 301

Boreas, 212

Borrach, 321, 325, 326

Bowlby Cliff, 244, 245

Branch, Red, 307, 308, 320, 321, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332, 333

Breton, 267

Brisingamen, 229, 255, 260

Britain, 244, 268

Brittany, 267

Brocken, 233

Browning, E. B., 209, 218

Buinne the Red, 322, 329

Byron, 10


Calliope, 32

Calvary, 216

Calvinism, 215

Calydon, 69, 70, 71, 78

Calydonian Hunt, 69, 72, 76

Campbell, Thos., 266

Carlyle, Thos., 215, 216, 266

Carmichael, Alexander, 307

Carraig Uisneach, 325

Carricknarone, 299, 300

Cassiopeia, 123

Castor, 71

Cathbad, 307, 309, 310, 311, 327, 330, 332

Caucasus, Mt., 8

Celts, 289, 306

Cepheus, 123

Cerberus, 34

Ceyx, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 150, 151, 152, 153

Champions of the Red Branch, 307, 308

Chanson de Roland, 266

Chaos, 2

Charlemagne, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276,
    277, 280, 281, 282, 286, 287

Charles, King, 282

Charon, 37, 38

Chemmis, 117

Chinese, 208

Christian, 272, 275, 295, 303

Christianity, 215, 227, 232

Cimmerian Mountains, 148

Circe, 226

Claros, 145

Clio, 129

Clymene, 16, 17, 18, 24

Clytie, 189

Cocytus, 59, 63, 64, 104, 115, 167, 207

Coillchuan, 324

Colophon, 83, 86, 87

Conall, 321

Conchubar, 307

Conn, 290, 295, 299, 304, 305

Connaught, 304

Conor, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 313, 316, 317, 319, 320, 321, 322,
    323, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 333

Copenhagen, 244

Cordova, 268, 274

Corinth, 192, 193

Crete, 182, 183

Cruachan, Ben, 318

Cuchulainn, 321, 331, 332

Cyane, 163

Cyclades, 107

Cycnus, 24

Cynthian, 126

Cyprus, 11, 13, 60, 194, 202, 204

Cyrene, 155, 156, 157

Cytherea, 206

Cytherian shores, 203


D√¶dalus, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 187, 188

Dail-an-eas, 318

Dalness, 318

Dana√´, 105, 106, 107, 121

Dana√Ødes, 35

Dane, 233, 248, 250, 257, 259

Danish, 250, 251, 256

Dante, 16

Daphne, 42, 43, 44

Darthool, 306

Darvra, Lake, 293, 295, 296, 297

Dasent, 236

David, 272

Day, 2

Dearshul, 319

Decca, 304

Dedannans, 289, 291, 297, 301

Deirdr√™, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317,
    318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330,
    331, 332, 333

Delos, 172, 186

Demeter, 84, 162, 165, 166, 167, 168

Denmark, 245, 251

Derg, Lough, 290, 291

Derravaragh, Lough, 293

Destiny, The Winged, 223

Diana, II., 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 43, 70, 72, 73, 75, 76, 90, 97, 99,
    101, 103, 116, 125, 126, 127, 128, 130, 164, 173, 175, 190, 198,
    200, 203, 204, 210

Diana Vernon, 26

Douzeperes, 268, 269, 272, 274, 275, 277, 282, 283, 286, 287

Draighen, 325

Druid, 307, 309, 310, 327, 330, 332

Druid's runes, 295

Druids, 294

Dryden, 45

Dryope, 210, 211

Dublin Bay, 317

Dunfidgha, 324

Dun Fin, 324

Dunskaith, 311

Dun Suibhne, 324

Dun Sween, 324

Durendala, 276, 284, 285


Echo, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 210

Edinburgh, 306

Egypt, 39, 117, 193

Egyptian, 217

Egyptians, 117

Emain Macha, 314, 323, 326, 327, 328, 333

Emerson, 243

Endymion, 26, 28, 29, 30

England, 344

Enna, 104

Epaphos, 16, 17, 21

Epimethus, 2, 5, 6, 7

Epirus, 70

Erdgeist, 216

Erebus, 2

Eridanus, 24

Erin, 289, 290, 295, 297, 298, 299, 301, 302, 307, 308, 311, 317, 319,
    320, 321, 322, 323, 325, 333

Erris, 295

Eros, 2, 42, 47, 48, 51, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 62, 66, 67, 91, 202, 203

Essa, 317

Etair, Ben, 317

Ethiopia, 118, 119, 120

Ethiopians, 23

Etive, Glen, 325

Etive, Loch, 318, 320, 322, 324, 326, 333

Etna, 101, 103

Eub≈ìan Sea, 122

Eumenides, 194

Europa, 87

Europe, 289

Eurydice, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 115, 159

Eva, 291, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296

Eve, 290, 291

Evenos, 91, 92, 93, 94


Faust, 216

Fechin, St., 222

Felim, 307, 308, 309

Fensalir, 238

Fergus, 321, 322, 323, 325, 326, 329

Ficra, 290, 295, 299, 304, 305

Finola, 290, 292, 293, 294, 298, 299, 300, 301, 303, 304, 305

Fiori Maggio, 103

Firedrake, 261, 262, 263, 264

Fleece, Golden, 39, 70

Florence, 124

Fontarabian, 282

France, 266, 275, 278, 279, 280, 282, 286

Franks, 267, 273, 276, 277, 279, 280

Freya, 227, 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 235, 238, 239, 255

Friday, 277

Frieslanders, 260

Frigga, 228

Furies, 35, 194, 196


Gabriel, 286

Gael, 300, 306, 307, 322, 332

Gaelic, 319

Galahad, 234

Galatea, 13, 14, 15

Ganelon, 272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 287

Gautier, Sir, 277, 282

Geasa, 326

Germanic language, 244

Germany, 233

Glendaruadh, 325

Glendaruel, 325

Gleneitche, 325

Glenlaidhe, 324

Glenmasan, 324

Glenmasan MS., 306

Glenorchy, 325

Goar, St., 224

Goethe, 216

Golden Fleece, 39, 70

Gordias, 134, 135

Gorgons, 113, 114, 115, 116, 120, 121, 123

Goths, 248, 249, 250, 252, 253, 260, 264, 265

Gothland, 249, 250, 252, 260

Grae√¶, 112

Greece, 26, 71, 72, 74, 154, 192, 193, 210, 223, 229, 234, 289

Greek, 100, 128, 160

Greeks, 3, 215

Green Islands, 307

Gregory, Lady, 307, 309

Grendel, 247, 248, 250, 253, 254, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 262


Hades, 34, 35, 36, 39, 65, 67, 167, 194

Halcyon birds, 153

Halcyone, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 150, 151, 152, 153

Hamlet, 124

Hardred, 260

Hastings, 266

Hauteclaire, 278

Hecate, 164, 205

Heine, 220, 223, 226

Hel, 236, 239, 240, 241

Heliades, 24

Hellas, 217

Hellenistic, 218

Henry VI, King, 144

Heorot, 246, 248, 251, 256

Hera, 169, 170, 175

Heredia, De, 208

Hermes, 5, 111, 112, 116, 120, 210, 211

Hermoder, 239, 240

Hesiod, 4

Hesperides, Garden of the, 113, 114, 116, 117, 118, 137

Hesperus, 144

Hlidskialf, 231

Hodur, 238, 239

Holy Loch, 324

Homeric Hymns, 210

Howth, Hill of, 317

Hrothgar, 246, 247, 248, 250, 251, 254, 255, 256, 257

Hyacinthus, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133

Hyde, Dr. Douglas, 307

Hygeia, 88

Hygelac, 248, 260

Hyleus, 74

Hymen, 33


Ibycus, 192, 194, 195, 196

Icarus, 181, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188

Ice Giants, 230

Ida, Mount, 185

Idas, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 97, 98, 99

Idmon, 83, 86

Illann the Fair, 322, 326, 329

Ingelow, Jean, 167

Inis Glora, 295, 301, 302, 303, 304

Iniskea, 302

Inistrynich, 324

Innisdraighende, 324

Invermasan, 324

Ionia, 145, 147

Ionian Sea, 217

Ireland, 289, 306

Iris, 148, 149

Ivros Domnann, 295, 301

Ixion, 35


Jason, 39, 70, 71, 73

Jerusalem, 216

Jonathan, 272

Jove, 4, 25, 49, 64

Joyce, 305

Judas, 274

Julius C√¶sar, 261

Juno, 146, 148, 150

Jupiter, 8, 95, 210


Keats, 129, 180

Keos, 106

Kemoc, 303, 304, 305

Kingsley, Charles, 105, 232


Ladon, 200

Lang, Andrew, 27

Langobarden, 232

Larguen, 304, 305

Larissa, 122

Latmos, Mount, 27, 30

Latona, 125, 126, 127, 128, 169, 170, 171, 172

Lavarcam, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 327, 328

Lebynthos, 186

Leinster, Book of, 306

Lethe, 149

Leto, 169

Libetlera, 41

Libya, 23, 116

Libyan, 39

Light, 2

Liguria, 24

Lilith, 220

L√Ær, 289, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294, 296, 297, 298, 300, 301, 302, 303,
    305

Loki, 234, 236, 237, 238, 239, 242

Lombardy, 232

Lomond, Loch, 320

London Bridge, 221

Long Loch, 320

Longbeards, 232

Longfellow, 234, 241, 243, 244

Lora, Falls of, 318

Lorelei, 220, 223, 224, 225

Love, 2

Lowell, 10, 38

Luna, 27

Lycia, 170

Lycormas, 93, 94

Lydia, 83, 88, 128

Lyra, 41

Lysimeleia, 101


Macleod, Fiona, 31, 197, 218, 219, 223, 301, 306, 307, 315, 332, 333

Madonna, 227

Mahommed, 267

Mannanan, 292, 331

Marpessa, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99

Marsiglio, 267

Marsile, 267, 268, 272, 274, 275, 279, 280, 281

Mary, Virgin, 227

Mayo, 295

Meander, 183

Meath, West, 293

Medusa, 108, 110, 111, 112, 113, 115, 116, 120

Meleager, 69, 70, 72, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80

Michael, St., 286

Midas, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 141, 142, 143, 198, 210

Milanion, 79, 80, 81

Milesians, 297

Milo, 10

Milon, 269, 271

Milton, 8, 38, 217

Minos, 182, 183, 188

Montjoie, 279, 281

Moore, Thos., 289

Morgue, 221

Morpheus, 149, 150, 151

Morris, William, 49, 50, 58, 68, 115

---- Lewis, 29, 67, 165, 168, 202, 207

Moschus, 87

Mount Olympus, 41, 81

Mowgli, 214

Moyle, 289, 295, 298, 301, 317

Mull, 317

Munster, 304

Muses, 41, 129

Musset, De, 218


N√§geling, 250, 251

Naiades, 25

Naismes de Bavi√®re, 272

Nanna, 235, 241

Naoise, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 322, 323,
    324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332

Narcissus, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180

Nelson, 100

Neptune, 93, 94, 99

Nereids, 188

Nestor, 71, 72

Nibelungs, 224

Niflheim, 236, 237, 239

Niobe, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128

Norman, 233, 266

Norseman, 331

Norsemen, 228, 229, 234

North Channel, 295

North Cape, 260

North Sea, 244

Norway, 233, 331


Odin, 228, 229, 230, 231, 232, 234, 235, 236, 237

Odysseus, 221, 226

Oea, 319

≈íneus, 69, 70

Oise, 214, 215

Olifant, 276, 280, 284, 285

Oliver, 272, 277, 278, 280, 281, 282, 283, 287

Olivier, 266, 282

Olympians, 6, 9, 60, 112, 129, 180, 211

Olympus, 3, 4, 5, 24, 45, 46, 49, 67, 68, 86, 95, 105, 108, 122, 126,
    135, 140, 155, 166, 171, 185, 187, 191, 203, 207, 210, 211

Olympus, Mount, 130

Orion's Belt, 228

Orpheus, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 159, 210

Orphics, 39, 40, 41

Ortygia, 100, 104

Otuel, Sir, 288

Ovid, 25, 45, 86, 197


Pactolus, 83, 138

Pagan, 285

Paganism, 215, 216

Pallas Athen√©, 3, 83, 84, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 115, 120

Palodes, 217

Pan, 59, 63, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 209,
    210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219

Pandora, 1, 2, 5, 6, 7

Pantheism, 215, 216

Paphian, 206

Paphos, 15, 203

Paros, 223

Parthenian Hill, 71

Patrick, St., 295, 302

Pax√¶, 217

Paynim, 280, 283

Peleus, 71

Peneus, 42, 43, 44, 45

Perdrix, 182

Perseus, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116,
    117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123

Persephone, 80, 161, 164, 165, 167

Phaeton, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25

Phillips, Stephen, 96

Phineus, 120

Phlegethon, 194

Ph≈ìbus, 129

Ph≈ìbus Apollo, 18, 19

Ph≈ìnicians, 120

Phrygia, 134, 135, 136, 142

Pied Piper, 212

Pirithous, 71

Pitys, 210, 212

Pleiades, 27, 90

Plemmgrium, 101

Plexippus, 71

Pluto, 23, 35, 36, 37, 38, 64, 80, 103, 115, 120, 162, 163, 165, 166,
    167, 210

Pollux, 71

Polydectes, 106, 107, 109, 110, 121

Pomona, 210

Poseidon, 146, 172, 186, 192, 222

Praxiteles, 124

Prometheus, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10

Proserpine, 35, 36, 64, 65, 66, 161, 162, 163, 165, 166, 167, 192

Proteus, 100, 157, 158, 159

Psyche, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60,
    61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 210

Purgatorio, 16

Pygmalion, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 102

Pyrenees, 275


Quail Island, 101


Rachel, 128

Rainschevaux, 266

Raphael, St., 286

Rathlin Island, 325

Red Branch, Champions of, 307, 308, 320, 321, 332, 333

Red Branch, House of, 327, 328, 329, 330

Retaliator, The, 331

Rheims, Bishop of, 272

Rhine, 224, 225

Ringhorn, 240

Roland, 266, 267, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 276, 277, 278, 279,
    280, 281, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288

Rollant, 266

Roman de Rose, 266

Roman Empire, 267

Romans, 27

Roncevall, 266

Roncesvalles, 267, 274, 275, 276, 277, 281, 282, 286

Rossa the Red, 321, 323

Round Table, 268

Rowland, 282

Runcyvale, 288


Sackville, Lady Margaret, 197

Saeland, 244, 265

Samos, 107, 186

Samson, 160

Saracens, 267, 274, 276, 277, 278, 279, 280, 282, 283, 285, 286

Saragossa, 267, 272

Saxon, 233

Scandinavia, 227, 245

Scotland, 220, 306

Scott, Sir Walter, 26, 282

Scyld Scefing, 245, 246

Seine, 221

Selene, 27, 210

Seriphos, 106, 109, 120, 121

Seumas, 218, 223

Sgathaig, 311

Shakespeare, 31, 124, 134, 192, 204, 223, 261

Shannon, 290

Sharp, William, 301

Shee Finnaha, 289, 290, 296, 302

Shelley, 9, 104, 161

Sicily, 36, 100, 104, 162, 163, 167, 186, 188

Silenus, 136

Simonides, 106

Sipylus, Mount, 128

Sirens, 226

Sisyphus, 35

Skene, W. F., 307

Skye, Isle of, 311

Sleipnir, 236

Socrates, 153

Somnus, 148, 149, 150

Spain, 267

Spartan, 129

Spenser, 88

Striven, Loch, 320

Styx, 19, 63, 64

Sweden, 233

Swedes, 249

Swinburne, 74

Sylvan deities, 214

Synge, J. M., 307

Syracuse, 100, 101

Syria, 216

Syrinx, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 210


Taenarus, 34

Taillefer, 266

Tailleken, 295

Talus, 182

Tantalus, 35, 124

Telamon, 71, 73

Tennyson, 27, 154, 216

Termagaunt, 267

Thames, 221

Thamus, 217

Theban, 124

Thebes, 124, 125, 126

Theseus, 71

Thessaly, 144, 146, 147, 152

Thrace, 32, 33, 38, 39

Tiberius, 216

Titan, 8, 9, 35

Titans, 2, 4, 117, 124

Toxeus, 71

Trachine, 150

Triton, 100

Tussypere, 288

Turpin, 266, 277, 279, 280, 282, 283, 284, 287

Tymolus, 83, 87

Tyrian, 86


Uffizi Palace, 124

Ulster, 307

Ultonians, 307, 313, 320, 329, 330, 331, 332, 333

Uladh, 332

Ulva, 222

Urchain, Glen, 325

Usna, Sons of, 306, 311, 312, 313, 315, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322,
    324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332, 333


Valhalla, 228, 267

Vali, 237

Vandals, 231

Vatican, 11

Veillantif, 276, 282

Venus, 11, 26, 202

Vernon, Diana, 26

Versailles, 11

Virgil, 194

Vulcan, 4


Wace, 266

Wagmund, 264

Walpurgis Night, 233

Wessex, 244

Westminster, 221

Whitby, 244

Wiglaf, 263, 264

William the Conqueror, 266

Winged Destiny, The, 223

Winilers, 231, 232

Wolf Woman, 258, 260, 262, 263


Yeats, W. B., 307

Yorkshire, 244, 265


Zeus, 3, 4, 8, 9, 22, 24, 30, 34, 86, 95, 105, 106, 107, 112, 120,
    123, 124, 166, 169, 170, 172, 202, 206

Zephyr, 129

Zephyrus, 51, 54, 59, 71, 103, 131, 133, 180




Transcriber's Note

Minor typographical errors (omitted punctuation, omitted or transposed
letters, etc.) have been amended without note. Inconsistent
hyphenation and accent use has been made consistent within the main
text, again without note. Any inconsistencies between quotations and
the main text remain as printed.

There is a lot of archaic language in this text, which remains as
printed. The author also used alternative spelling in places (e.g.
Epimethus rather than the more usual Epimetheus); this remains as
printed. There is a reference to Michael Angelo on page 203 and in
the Index, by which the author presumably meant Michelangelo; this
has also been left as printed.

The following amendments have been made:

  Page 268--were amended to was--"... with Saragossa still
  unconquered was too much to hope for."

  Page 304--Kemoc amended to Larguen--"Then Larguen, in
  furious anger, ..."

Illustrations have been moved so that they are not in mid-paragraph.
The frontispiece illustration has been moved to follow the title page.

Index entries have been made consistent with the main text, as
follows:

  Page 334--Aristaeus amended to Arist√¶us; Athene, Pallas
  amended to Athen√©, Pallas.

  Page 335--page reference 230 amended to 300 in
  Carricknarone entry; page reference 313 added to Deirdr√™
  entry.

  Page 336--page reference 344 amended to 244 in England
  entry; Eridamus amended to Eridanus.

  Page 337--page reference 86 added to Idmon entry; Inis Rea
  amended to Iniskea.

  Page 338--Na√Ødes amended to Naiades; page references 319
  and 325 added to Naoise entry; Oeneus amended to ≈íneus;
  entry for Olivier originally had page references
  duplicating the entry for Oliver, these have been amended
  to the actual references in the text; page reference 119
  added to Perseus entry.

  Page 339--page reference 19 added to Phaeton entry;
  Pirithons amended to Pirithous; Rachael amended to Rachel;
  Roncevalles amended to Roncesvalles; Shee Finaha amended
  to Shee Finnaha; Sisyplus amended to Sisyphus; Taillekin
  amended to Tailleken.

  Page 340--Tiberias amended to Tiberius; Uffizzi Palace
  amended to Uffizi Palace; Uluadh amended to Uladh.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Book of Myths, by Jean Lang

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BOOK OF MYTHS ***

***** This file should be named 22693-0.txt or 22693-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/6/9/22693/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Sam W. and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.